
Foreword
Introduction
PART I
HOW THE AURA REFLECTS YOUR LIFE
Chapter 1
YOUR SPIRITUAL BANK ACCOUNT
Your Spiritual Booster Shot • How to Use This Book • Seeing the Aura •
The Metaphysical Tradition • Definition of Terms
Chapter 2
ANATOMY OF THE AURA
Shape of the Aura • Divisions of the Aura • The Inner Aura • Thought
Forms • Understanding the Energy Centers (Chakras) • Energy Center
Radiations • Exploring Mixed, Devolved, and Enlightened Auras • Types of
Auras • Auras of Animals • Auras of Plants and Minerals
Chapter 3
THE COLORS YOU ARE

Enlightened Colors • Unenlightened Colors • A Gallery of Auric Portraits
PART II
MEDITATING WITH DIVINE LIGHT
Chapter 4
THREE KEYS TO WORKING WITH SPIRITUAL ENERGY
Key 1—Decide What You Want the Light to Do for You • Key 2—Draw the
Light into Your Aura • Key 3—Apply the Light to Effect the Change You
Desire
Chapter 5
SIX STEPS TO CHANGE YOUR AURA
Understanding the Higher Self • The Higher Self Meditation • Step 1—
Relax • Step 2—Establish Protection • Step 3—Check Your Spiritual
Centers • Step 4—Connect with Your Higher Self • Step 5—Down-Ray the
Light • Step 6—Ground Yourself
Chapter 6
TAPPING THE POWER RAYS
The Light as Consciousness • Purification • New Life Force • Wisdom •
Spiritual Love • Divine Peace • Balance and Harmony • Divine Intelligence
• Concentration • Prosperity • The Pure White Light
Chapter 7
GUIDELINES FOR EFFECTIVE MEDITATIONS
Understanding the Definition of Spiritual Energy • Effects of the Light
Process—the Light in Action • Developing a Spiritual Point of View

PART III
UNFOLDING YOUR SPIRITUAL POWER
Chapter 8
HOW TO CHANGE MENTAL AND EMOTIONAL STATES
Thoughts—the Kingdom Within • Spiritual Energy and Thoughts •
Emotions—the Spiritual Motor • Spiritual Energy and Emotions
Chapter 9
TEN TRANSFORMATIONAL MEDITATIONS
Resentment • Hate • Anger • Jealousy • Depression • Guilt • Grief • Fear •
Worry • Pride
Chapter 10
IMPROVING PERSONAL AFFAIRS
Building Prosperity • Poverty Consciousness • Tapping the Turquoise Ray •
Career • Three Energetic Phases of Building a Career • Choosing a
Profession • Generating a New Job • Dead-End Job • Unhappy at Work •
Getting Fired
Chapter 11
STRENGTHENING RELATIONSHIPS
Auric Interactions • Family • Friends • Professional • Adversaries •
Romance and Marriage • Sex and Spiritual Energy • To Forgive Is Divine
Chapter 12
LIVING INSPIRITUAL RHYTHM
Motion of the Chakras • Auric Compartments and Rhythmic Life Flow •
Pacing Your Meditations
PART IV

THE AURA AND YOUR MYSTICAL NATURE
Chapter 13
DIVINE DIRECTION AND GUIDANCE
Becoming Receptive to Inspiration • Connecting with Your Source of
Inspiration • Accept and Use the Guidance Given • Spiritual Illumination
Chapter 14
THE AURA AND SPIRITUAL EVOLUTION
How Evolution Expresses Itself in the Aura • Meditations to Accentuate
Evolution • Making Room for the Divine in Your Life • Being of Service •
Working with the Color Division and the Inner Aura • Overcoming
Adversity • Walking the Path of Light
Chapter 15
THE TRANSCENDENT CONSCIOUSNESS
Your Aura and the Mystical Awakening • The Soul and The Christ
Consciousness • Meditative Prayers to Stir Your Mystical Awareness • The
Transcendent and the Search for Truth
PART V
SUPPORTING YOUR MEDITATION PRACTICE
Chapter 16
THE LIGHT IN ALL ASPECTS OF YOUR LIFE
Living in a Sea of Energy • Protection • Closing the Psychic Door • The
Energy We Leave Behind • Children and Meditation • Purifying Your Home
• Sending Light to Others in Need • Leading a Group Meditation
Chapter 17

REFLECTIVE MEDITATION
Guided Imagery
Chapter 18
AFFIRMATIONS AND VISUALIZATIONS
Affirmations • The Light and Affirmations • Visualizations • The Light and
Visualizations
Chapter 19
FASHION AND COLOR
Wearing Blue • Wearing Red • Wearing Pink • Wearing Green • Wearing
Orange • Wearing White • Wearing Yellow • Wearing Purple • Wearing
Mixed Colors • Wearing Neutral Colors • Wearing Dark Colors • Color in
Your Home and at Work
Chapter 20
CRYSTALS, CANDLES, AND MEDITATION
Preparing and Caring for Crystals • Meditating with Your Crystals •
Spiritual Energy and Crystals • Lighting Candles in Meditation • Using
Candles in Meditation
Chapter 21
PARTING THOUGHTS
Appendix—Quick Reference for Meditation
Index
Author Biographies
About Spiritual Arts Institute


ILLUSTRATIONS
Illustrations in italics appear in the color insert.
2.1 The Three Auric Shapes 24
2.2 Divisions of the Aura, A
2.2 Divisions of the Aura, B
2.2 Divisions of the Aura, C
2.2 Divisions of the Aura, D
2.2 Divisions of the Aura, E
2.2 Divisions of the Aura, F
2.3 The Energy Centers (Chakras)
2.4 Energy Center Radiations
2.5 The Mixed Aura
2.6 The Devolved Aura
2.7 The Enlightened Aura
3.1 Auric Color Chart
3.2 Romantic Love
3.3 Intelligence
3.4 Hatred
3.5 Anger
3.6 Wealth Consciousness
3.7 Poverty Consciousness
3.8 Fear
3.9 The Spiritual Aspirant
5.1 The Higher Self Point of Spiritual Knowing
5.2 Moving the Centers Clockwise
5.3 The Meditative Pose
7.1 The Divine Light Process
7.2 Releasing Depression with Spiritual Energy
8.1 Mental/Emotional Pattern

11.1 Two People Fighting
11.2 Refusing an Angry Outburst
11.3 Polarity in the Aura
11.4 Root Chakra Energy
16.1 Closing the Psychic Door


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
THIS 25TH ANNIVERSARY EDITION of Change Your Aura, Change Your Life
represents the fourth incarnation of this work—the first edition inaugurating
the writing collaboration of the authors. The manuscript was built on
decades of notes and materials Barbara had gathered on the aura from her
countless clairvoyant experiences. With each version of this book,
knowledge was added, and there was a refinement in the presentation of the
many spiritual principles and exercises. We offer our gratitude to all who
creatively contributed to these earlier versions.
Through the years, there are many people to thank who have helped
support this work along the way. To start, we thank all the students of
Spiritual Arts Institute who practice these Divine Light principles, many
now becoming certified healers and teachers in these auric techniques. We
thank the SAI Board of Directors who shepherd the mission of the Institute
and to the many donors who financially contribute to SAI without which we
could not produce these books. We are deeply grateful to the SAI staff,
contractors, and volunteers who run the Institute and publishing efforts.
Our gratitude goes out to Simon Warwick-Smith who has worked with
us through the years helping to build our publishing presence to where it is
today. Our appreciation goes to the late Nigel Yorwerth who first helped get
this book into bookstores and establish a lasting presencein the marketplace.
We are grateful to Bob Erdmann for the excellent job he has done over the
years in getting the book published in other countries. Our thanks to Nita
Ybarra for her wonderful cover and interior design. This is our fifth
collaboration, and she is endlessly creative and inventive with every design
she does. Our gratitude goes to Jeffrey Bedrick who did the color and black-
and-white illustrations. It was a big job to bring to life the intricate nuances
of the aura. He was particularly effective at capturing the luminous quality
of the auric field. A big thank you to Sara Sgarlat for her publicity efforts
through the years. It’s a pleasure to work with her and her deep knowledge
of the spiritual arena. Thanks as well goes to Matthew Gilbert for his

editorial support. Finally, thank you to Loma Media, Steve Morris, Wasabi
Publicity, and Tribal Core for all their creative efforts in marketing and PR.


PREFACE TO THE 25TH ANNIVERSARY
EDITION
THE PUBLICATION OF THE 25th anniversary edition comes at a turning point in
the public awareness of metaphysics and the aura. More than ever, people
are having their spiritual awakening and searching for answers to life’s
mysteries. Never has knowledge of the aura been more important for those
looking to develop themselves spiritually and to better the world. Despite
the many challenges we face, there is more opportunity than ever to develop
your spiritual nature. May this book help people find encouragement and
recognize that their life is precious. We are all part of the grand fabric of
life.
We have added new chapters rounding out a broad range of topics
related to developing the aura. One has been added on the aura and spiritual
rhythm and how to keep the differing facets of your aura in harmony. We
included a new chapter on using crystals and candles in your meditation
practice. This is a popular topic that many ask about when first starting to
meditate with Divine Light. And there is a chapter delving into the more
esoteric aspects of the aura—how the aura helps unfold your mystical
awareness. Ultimately, and at the right time, we are all meant to transcend
the material sensing of things and step into the greater spiritual reality of
which the aura is a crucial part.
We encourage you to pursue your spiritual aspirations with greater zeal
and motivation. Make the metaphysical journey the centerpiece of your life
and everything else will fall into place. As Rudyard Kipling said in his
immortal poem “If,”
“If you can fill the unforgiving minute with sixty seconds worth of distance
run, yours is the earth and everything that’s in it.”
Light and love,

Barbara and Dimitri


FOREWORD
IT HAS BEEN AN honor to contribute to the writing of Change Your Aura,
Change Your Life. I have known Barbara for many years and the changes in
myself that I have experienced as a result of working with the aura and
spiritual energy have been miraculous. In my case, it was not so much a
matter of overcoming a trauma or personal tragedy. As a matter of fact, I
came from a well-adjusted home life. I grew up with loving parents and a
brother who’s my best friend. What I did have was an inexhaustible desire
to tap into the spiritual side of my life. That desire has been realized to a
greater degree than I ever imagined possible through my association with
Barbara and this work.
At the time we started working together, Barbara had very little
organized information covering these marvelous teachings. She had been
teaching for many years, but most of the instructions were given orally. For
those who have been with or studied the teachings of great souls, this
mystery becomes understandable. It often becomes the duty of the people
around such an inspired teacher to organize and distribute the information
and practices presented. It remains the teacher’s job to maintain the spiritual
connection necessary to be effective and accurate. So in addition to my
becoming her student, we became writing partners, which eventually led to
our collaborating on Change Your Aura, Change Your Life.
In all the time I’ve known Barbara, her teachings have remained
entirely consistent and reliable. I’ve never once had reason to question the
authenticity of these instructions. I’ve been a witness to many healings and
transformations, demonstrating all the more the validity and usefulness of
spiritual energy.
No book can replace the direct experience of working with the aura and
Divine Light. Yet I hope with all my heart that Change Your Aura, Change
Your Life makes that magnificent journey of the spiritual path a little
brighter and more understandable for you—as it has for me.

Dimitri Moraitis


INTRODUCTION
A MIRACULOUS SPIRITUAL FORCE operates in the midst of us. Although
invisible to physical sensing, it is vividly alive and active. It is a part of us
and we are a part of it. This force is known as the human energy field—the
aura. In the following pages, we’ll explore what the auric field is and how
to improve it by working with spiritual energy. This book is designed to be
a hands-on training manual in how you may work with the aura to improve
the quality of your life. It introduces a powerful meditation tool for
accessing an unlimited source of spiritual power that is simple and easy to
follow.
The depth of activity that goes on within each of us, unseen by the
physical eyes, is truly amazing. For anyone who has studied this subject, it
becomes clear that there is far more to the unseen part of life than there is to
the seen. It is my hope that this book will give you a greater knowledge of
yourself, who you really are, and your unlimited potential as a spiritual
being.
Every spiritual process described here has been experienced through my
own direct clairvoyant observations. I was born with the gift of spiritual
sight. From early childhood, I could see auras, and I had countless other
spiritual visions as well. These experiences have always seemed normal. As
a matter of fact, when I was very young, I assumed that everyone saw what
I did. It was a rude awakening when I found out that they didn’t.
Clairvoyance (from the French, for “clear seeing”) is the ability to
observe the normally invisible spiritual processes of life. I was about three
years old when my spiritual sight opened to the beautiful world of auras. I
began by seeing them around people and things. Though I had little
comprehension of what I was seeing, I remember watching the auras around
my parents and siblings and noticed how the colors would change according
to their moods and actions. I remember taking trips into the country and
seeing the auras around trees and flowers and thinking how beautiful life is.
And how God must be everywhere.
I had an experience when I was about four years old that taught me an
important lesson about my abilities. My father was a Greek Orthodox priest

with a talent for engineering. The archdiocese would send him to various
towns to build a church and then to build up a congregation. He did this in
many places around the country, always with great success. As a result, our
family constantly moved, which wasn’t always easy. I had three brothers
and two sisters. Living on a priest’s salary was quite a feat in those days,
especially considering that we moved so often. How my mother was able to
keep us happy and well-cared for could be a book in itself —she did a
wonderful job!
One day, we all went to the dedication of a new church. It was a major
event, and our family was a big part of it. The archbishop had come from
the Archdiocese of New York. There were thousands of people. The
archbishop stood regally resplendent in his tiara and cross before the altar.
Beside him, to his right and left, were two bishops who were officiating
with him. I studied the aura of the archbishop and found his energy field to
be menacing. Instead of brilliant, uplifting colors, dark, grotesque colors
emanated from him. However, the bishop to his right, who was lower in
rank, had a beautiful aura with striking pearl luster colors.
In the Greek Orthodox faith, it is customary to kiss the hand of the
officiating archbishop, priest, or bishop. When it was our turn to go down
the aisle and kiss the hand of the archbishop, I refused. My mother insisted.
In front of the whole congregation, I screamed, “No, he’s a monster! He
eats children!” Needless to say, my mother took me out and gave me a good
spanking.
So I learned that this gift could be a curse as well as a blessing. Who
wants to see ugly energies around someone—especially a family member or
loved one? I learned to keep quiet about what I saw and to shut off these
gifts when I needed to so I wouldn’t be overwhelmed.
In my teens, I learned that it was possible not only to observe the aura
but to change and improve it. I also became aware that I was not alone in
this process, that I was being helped by beings from the spirit world. From
childhood I could see them, and as I grew older, they made their presence
more known to me. In my twenties, I embarked on a training program with
these celestial beings, who instructed me in many facets of the spiritual
world. This training eventually led to my becoming a teacher of
metaphysics, including the principles imparted in this book. I also had an
important spiritual teacher in the physical world who taught me and helped
prepare me for the rigors of teaching.

When it came time for me to begin my professional work, I hesitated. I
was working at an insurance company at the time, a single mother
supporting two children, and this spiritual work seemed like a risky venture,
even though I knew its value. I also knew how much responsibility was
involved in being a spiritual teacher and wasn’t sure I was up to the task.
However, I was prompted—in the most unusual of ways—by many who
saw that I had something to offer. By the time I was in my early thirties, I
had given up my job and begun teaching metaphysics full-time. I’ve been
teaching ever since.
I wish to emphasize that the exercises in this book are by no means a
replacement for trained professional guidance. Sometimes your own
spiritual efforts will not be enough to remedy a condition, and you will need
experienced outside help. Certainly, if you are experiencing serious physical
or psychological disorders, you should consult a doctor, counselor, or
experienced spiritual healer to complement any spiritual work of your own.
A note about the illustrations: While I have made every effort to show
the aura as accurately as possible, a certain amount of interpretation is
inevitable. In addition, it’s almost impossible to see the entire aura, in toto,
at the same time. When I’m reading a person’s aura, I focus on one part
before going on to the next. In these auric illustrations, I have tried to show
specific qualities of the aura as well as the human aura as a whole. Most of
these renderings are cross sections of the auras described. In actuality, the
aura is very much three-dimensional and has movement.
I wish to thank the many friends, family members, colleagues, and
students who have been so patiently supportive during the writing of this
book. It has been many years in the making. I would like to acknowledge
my coauthor, Dimitri Moraitis, for his tireless work. I drew on a great deal
of past knowledge as well as fresh inspiration for the material in this book.
It became Dimitri’s job to distill the information into an organized, literary
form. The shape this book has taken is largely due to his creative
contribution.
I hope this book will inspire you to new spiritual heights. I have been
teaching for many years, and it has been fulfilling to see how working with
the light has helped people to grow and express more of their true potential.
Someone once said that it’s all well and good to build bridges or
magnificent buildings, but that the greatest feat of all is to be “builders of
men.” I couldn’t agree more.

Barbara Y. Martin


PART I
How the Aura Reflects Your Life


CHAPTER 1
YOUR SPIRITUAL BANK ACCOUNT
IMAGINE A BANK ACCOUNT in your name with unlimited cash reserves
awaiting your use. First you’d say it was impossible, but if you saw the
account and were actually able to make a cash advance, things would
change, wouldn’t they? Right now, you have the ability to tap an unlimited,
spiritual reservoir of energy that can help you in every aspect of your life.
Think of it as your spiritual bank account. Need more love in your life?
Bring in the energy that is the embodiment of love. Looking for new
inspiration? Call on the energy that inspires new ideas. How about more
prosperity? Draw in the very power that manifests wealth. This spiritual
account of living light is far more valuable than any cash account could
ever be, and nothing is asked of you other than to use it.
This gift from God is one of the essential keys to developing a better
life. By tapping into this spiritual account, you can greatly quicken your
personal and spiritual progress. You can produce what you want faster,
solve personal problems more effectively, and be able to help others to a
greater degree.
This divine power can be perceived as a brilliant, iridescent light, with
colors far more splendid than anything found in the physical spectrum.
Spiritual light has its own source and purpose, which is very different from
the light we see with our physical eyes. I have seen the Divine Light help
mend relationships; pull people out of suicidal depressions; heal physical,
mental, and sexual abuse; create harmonious marriages; help overcome
addictions and perversions; get people out of financial disasters; and take
them to spiritual heights they never dreamed possible. The more these
people dedicated themselves, the more the light could work for them. Some
of these transformations were instantaneous, others took time, but all were
realized.

Throughout the centuries, spiritual light has been depicted in scriptural
writings, literature, and art. In Genesis, one of the first acts of God was to
bring forth light. In the New Testament, the dove of peace blesses humanity
by beaming rays of light from its mouth. The light of Christ temporarily
blinded Saul while he was on the road to Damascus. Countless pictures
show angels and archangels beaming light to suffering souls to heal and
restore them. Most benedictions show the recipient anointed with light.
People who have reported near-death experiences almost always
acknowledge the presence of a magnificent light. Divine Light is the
backdrop to almost every heavenly scenario and the centerpiece of every
religion.
If you’ve studied metaphysics, you’re familiar with the white light.
People use it in specific situations such as for protection or to illuminate a
condition. The image is very strong: light dispelling darkness. The white
light is definitely part of your spiritual reservoir. In addition, there is a vast
array of other spiritual energies at your disposal for personal and spiritual
development. Just as physical light can be divided into its spectral colors,
spiritual light reaches you in rays of various colors—with each ray serving
a different spiritual purpose.
How does your aura fit into all this? First, your aura is energy.
Everything you feel, think, and do radiates a spiritual energy that comes
through in various colors and hues. This essence is the aura. It is through
the miracle of the aura that the Divine Light expresses itself in you. Your
aura, then, is an individual expression of the Divine Light in action. Just as
the spiritual reservoir is your divine bank account, your aura is a spiritual
bank statement that registers and keeps a record of how you’re using that
spiritual energy. When you draw in spiritual energy, you first draw that
energy into your auric field before putting it to use in your life. So, by
making a change in your aura, there will automatically be a corresponding
change in your life. Change your aura, you change your life. That’s one of
the spiritual laws.
Spiritual energy may be defined as the Divine Light that propels the life
force of God to all creation. In other words, there has to be a power that
sends the love of God, the peace of God, the wisdom of God, and all the
attributes of God to each of us. Spiritual energy is the conduit of
consciousness. Without this energetic conduit, we would have no means of

receiving anything from God. Take time to contemplate this, as it is the key
to effectively working with spiritual energy.
Spiritual light is part of the divine radiations that emanate from the very
heart and mind of God. It is this energy that sustains all life and is the
power behind all activities, physical and spiritual. From its purest state,
light flows from the highest spheres and planes of creation down into
various gradations, to fulfill many applications. If you need more love, the
light will bring to you a flow of Divine Love. If you need prosperity, Divine
Light will be imbued with a different quality and bring you the
consciousness of wealth.
As Divine Light flows from this celestial source into your aura, it
generates the spiritual power necessary to create whatever it is you are
focusing your attention on. To give you an example, when my eldest
brother, Philip, was young, he wished to become an opera singer. He had an
incredible voice, and everyone felt he was destined for greatness. When he
started out, he had little training or money. His voice teacher gave him
complementary lessons because he saw his potential. In my brother’s aura, I
could see the spiritual power connected to creative talent—a bright electric
blue light. I also saw a deeper royal blue energy, which showed his
determination to succeed at his art. These colors were the beginnings of
what would become the fulfillment of his spiritual purpose.
As I watched his aura through the years of training and struggle, his
auric colors gradually brightened as his talent and skill increased. At one
point, I began seeing a sparkling turquoise in the energy coming into his
aura, indicative of prosperity. This energy was showing itself even though it
had not yet materialized in his life. It was then that I knew good things were
around the corner for him. His aura had all the earmarks of success, and
sure enough, he soon became very successful in his field.
You have the ability to change and improve yourself. It doesn’t matter
where you are or what you’ve done with your life. You are here for a
purpose and have been given the spiritual tools to succeed at that purpose.
By working on yourself you attract the spiritual energies that improve your
life. We all go through the experiences of learning and growing. Behind this
activity we’re gaining in spiritual power, which is the key to manifesting
the fruits of our efforts.

Your Spiritual Booster Shot
The most important act you can perform is to earn Divine Light. It’s the key
to all activities in life. You earn spiritual power by your every constructive
thought, word, deed, and feeling. Every positive thing you do, however
small, recognized or unrecognized, adds to you. The more light you earn,
the brighter your aura becomes and the higher in consciousness you climb.
That’s why it’s so important to conduct yourself in a spiritual manner and
treat others kindly.
You may ask, “Why not just be a good person? Why not simply do the
best you can and let God do the rest? Why go through this very focused
process of working with the aura and divine energy?” Of course, doing and
being good is an essential part of spiritual growth. It’s the hallmark of an
evolving soul. But just being good in itself doesn’t complete the whole
spiritual picture. You need to combine a loving nature with effective
spiritual tools to be successful in your personal and spiritual growth. There
will be many times when you will get stuck somewhere in life’s pursuits
and could benefit greatly by tapping into your spiritual reservoir. How
many times have you been aware of a problem or a fault and felt motivated
to correct that fault, but no matter what you do, it just doesn’t seem to
happen? How can that change come about if the power to make it happen
isn’t there?
Let me give you a few examples of how working with spiritual energy
helps accelerate change. I had a student who asked me if I could help her
sister. Her sister was a clothes designer, and I went to see her at a small
studio she had in Hollywood. When I walked in, I saw an attractive, kind-
looking woman, but one who also appeared to be bedraggled and confused.
Her hair was disheveled and she had circles under her eyes from lack of
sleep. Despite being such a brilliant designer, she was wearing a shabby
coat and clothes that looked like they came from a thrift store. Clearly
something dramatic had happened, and she needed help desperately. She
told me she had hardly eaten in days, so the first thing we did was go to a
restaurant to get some food in her.
She quickly told me her story. It turned out that her husband, who was
also her business partner, had up and left her, taking all the money they had.
They owned a small design studio that was doing well, yet somehow he

absconded with all the funds, which left her penniless. She was trying to
stay in business, but without funds of her own, she’d lost accounts and her
business was quickly collapsing. She’d even lost her home. When I met her,
she was sleeping in her studio and using the pattern table as a makeshift
bed! She was confused, angry, bewildered, and frustrated. She couldn’t
understand how her husband, who’d helped pay her way through design
school and start the business, would take advantage of her in such a callous
and cruel way.
When I first met her, I could see that this was a very talented person.
She had electric blue and powder blue in her aura, indicative of talent and
inspiration. There was gold and white light above her head, indicating that
she had spiritual potential. At the same time, she had allowed the
experience she was going through to muddy many aspects of her aura, and
it was very disoriented. There was a lot of gray, showing fear and worry.
There was also a scratchy tan-colored energy, showing lethargy. The
traumatic experience had put her in a mental fog. Although she was trying,
she didn’t know how to get out of her predicament. There was anger toward
her husband, which came through in vitiated red. There were also dark
brown, dark green, and little black energies around the emotional aspects of
her aura. These colors were reflecting her dark feelings and desire for
revenge.
Happily, she was very willing to work with the Divine Light and took to
the light right away. She worked with spiritual energy daily, and diligently
used many energies to get the job done. To her amazement, she started
feeling the effects of the light and, almost immediately, she began to regain
the hope and optimism she needed to get her life going again. She used the
purifying rays to cut loose the dark thoughts and emotions that were
building inside her. She used the dynamic energies to rekindle her self-
confidence, as the whole experience had left her self-esteem very low. She
worked with the balancing energies to bring her life back into harmony and
spiritual rhythm once again. There was a great deal of forgiveness work
done with the love ray, as well as working with the reenergizing energies to
build up her vitality and spiritual power.
Within three months, her diligence paid off. Her aura had dramatically
improved. It was much brighter and more luminous. The grays and muddy
disoriented colors were gone. Her vengeful feelings toward her husband
were gone, too, and she forgave him. The muddled energies that had been

clouding her thinking vanished, and now her mental body was sharp and
clear, with lemon yellow and silver. Emerald green was also strong in her
aura, showing that her life was much more balanced, her thinking much
clearer. Perhaps best of all, she was expressing her loving nature once
again, which showed up as a deep rose pink light. Her whole demeanor
improved, and she was a better person than ever before.
This change in her aura was reflected markedly in her life. She found a
place to live with a studio where she could do her designing. Although the
business she had started was gone, she enrolled in school to expand her
expertise and soon found a job in a manufacturing company as a designer.
She had landed on her feet and was thriving! And she’s been doing well
ever since. Another unexpected blessing: The two of us became great
friends. This is the power of spiritual energy.
In another situation, I counseled a compulsive spender. He was married,
with four children, and making good money as an accountant. Yet, he was
in deep financial waters because of his overspending. He would buy himself
cars, yachts, or whatever popped into his head, until all his funds were
depleted. Then he hadn’t even enough money to care for his family and was
always strapped for cash. His wife was so stressed by his behavior that she
eventually left him. His kids were just as angry. He knew he was causing
great pain, but in the grip of a raging compulsion, he felt powerless to resist.
He went to several psychiatrists, seeking help. In therapy, he discovered
that his problems stemmed from childhood experiences with his parents.
Pathologically frugal, they would deny him toys and other things that he
wanted. Whenever he desired something, they would usually refuse him. As
a result, he’d always felt deprived and emotionally insecure. Now an adult,
making good money, he felt an intense urge to overcompensate by buying
all the things he wanted—buy them outright, buy them now. Yet, not even
his newfound insight could stop him from compulsively spending.
When I first met him, he was up-front about his problems. He was a
good man and really wanted to fix things and save his marriage. To his
great advantage, he was open to working with Divine Light. His aura
showed that the negative energy he was creating hadn’t had time to really
settle in, but that he obviously had several areas to work on. He had lemon
yellow and silver energies radiating from the mental part of his aura
reflecting his strong, good mind. It was, however, clouded by some gray
energies mixed with mustard yellow, showing depression and

disorientation. There was also a gray cloud of worry above his head, born of
preoccupation with his condition.
Despite some worry vibrations around him, the bright orange in his aura
showed him to be an optimistic person. Dazzling blue energy in the
emotional part of his aura declared his passion for life. He was always out
there, trying to make the big score.
His obsessive desire for material things showed up in his aura as a
bright red energy. The fact that this energy was bright revealed that there
was nothing inherently wrong with his wanting these things. His problem
centered on the way he was going about getting the things he wanted.
However, he also had cocoa brown, signifying that he could be petty—
which accounted for his lack of attention in family matters.
In the upper part of his aura, just beyond the shell, he had some bloblike
thought forms. A dark green and black thought form on his right side
showed envy, as well as hatred of others who had more money or things
than he did. A thought form on the left was a vitiated red energy. This
showed his aggressive approach to being one step ahead of the next guy, no
matter what.
Fortunately, he’d become disciplined from his accounting training and
was able to dedicate himself to his transformational work. First, he worked
on cutting loose the anger he had toward his parents. Using the white light,
he transmuted old memories and the frustrations he felt from never getting
the things he wanted as a boy. He worked with blue-white fire to build up
new life force, and deep rose pink to forgive his parents for what they had
done. He gradually began to see that it was his parents’ right and free choice
to give or not to give him things. They had their own reasons, and he
couldn’t blame them for that. He also worked with the orange-red flame to
cut loose the thought forms of compulsive spending that he had created as a
result of his anger. He brought in a lot of gold and silver light to illuminate
the immaturity of his actions and to build logic and discipline into his
spending habits. Finally, he worked with the emerald green ray to help
regulate and stabilize his thinking habits.
Once he started to get a handle on himself, he began to use the deep
rose pink light on his family, so they would forgive him. He prayed for his
wife to come back to him. Once she saw that he really had changed his
ways, she forgave him and went back, as she was still very much in love
with him. The whole process took about a year, but he saved his marriage.

His aura had greatly brightened. He still had the silver and lemon yellow in
his mental center, but gone were the lethargic and depressing energies, as
well as the destructive thought forms that were encroaching on his aura. He
had a lot of rose pink light, showing the high degree of love he had
developed. He was expressing a beautiful royal blue energy, demonstrating
the deep loyalty he now had for his family. No longer would he put his own
desires and ambitions ahead of his family’s needs. A brilliant emerald green
light expressed the balance and harmony he was now feeling. He stopped
spending on himself and used his money for his family’s needs instead.
With his spending habits now under control and his accounting skills to
help him, he was able to get out of debt.
Could these people have worked things out on their own, without
tapping their spiritual bank account? Of course they could, but it would
have been a slow, grueling process, with the likelihood of setbacks before
they could get on their feet again. The point is why go through unnecessary
struggle or setbacks when God gives you the ability to access spiritual
energy that will definitely facilitate growth?
Life gives you all the time you need to achieve the great goal of
improving yourself. Yet, once you’re awakened to the greater possibilities
of life, you’re much more motivated to pursue your spiritual unfoldment.
By calling on spiritual energy, you can make changes in your life faster and
more effectively, your chances of sustained success far greater than if you
went at it on your own.
How To Use This Book
In the following pages are many examples of how to work with the light in
very practical situations. Yet, to gain the greatest benefit from using this
book, I want you to think of your light work not only as an opportunity for
help in the everyday challenges of life, but as an opportunity to come closer
to God. That is the ultimate purpose of the light work. By using Divine
Light to help you in the challenges of life, you are actually drawing closer
to God—closer to God’s love, God’s peace, God’s joy, God’s wisdom.
It goes without saying that you draw on this spiritual light only for
constructive purposes. Divine Light is not a genie or magic wand designed
to service your every whim, but a tool in your spiritual arsenal. It’s an

opportunity to invite God to come closer into your life. If you use the light
beneficently, for the good of all, access to your spiritual reservoir is
naturally strengthened and increased. If you misuse the light persistently or
maliciously, you won’t be able to draw on the reservoir as before until
you’re back on the right track.
The spiritual light facilitates change by giving you the power to step
into a greater spiritual awareness of life. That is the secret of spiritual light.
As you draw more power into your aura, you’re expanding your spiritual
awareness. Light and consciousness walk hand in hand. The more light you
have, the higher in consciousness you can climb. And as your consciousness
heightens, change is inevitable.
For example, a nurse who attended one of my classes was skeptical of
the light. She was dedicated to helping people, but thought some of these
metaphysical ideas were a little far-fetched. One night, as she waited in a
bar with her friends for dinner, two men nearby began arguing at the top of
their lungs. The argument soon turned into a fight. She had learned about
healing relationships with the love ray in class that week, so she decided to
test its power. As the men argued, she silently asked that they receive the
deep rose pink ray of spiritual love. To her great surprise, the fighting
stopped within minutes. The men looked at each other, wondering why they
were fighting at all. It turned out they were good friends who had gotten a
little drunk and were arguing over nothing. They ended up hugging and
buying each other drinks. The woman was dumbfounded. She came to class
the next week and related her extraordinary experience. Her skeptical mind
could easily have dismissed the whole thing as coincidence, but she knew
better. She said she’d never doubt the power of the light again.
How did the Divine Light stop these men from fighting? It didn’t. The
light helped these men receive a spiritual quickening of love, so they could
see for themselves what they were doing. Once quickened, they chose for
themselves to stop fighting. The fact that they were already good friends
made it easier to receive the light. And although the nurse was not a firm
believer, the fact that she was willing to give the light a fair chance made
her an effective emissary.
Drawing in Divine Light brings more divine awareness of whatever
you’re working on. If you’re calling on the light to increase prosperity,
you’re actually drawing in more divine consciousness of prosperity to
create conditions of abundance and supply. Or if you’re calling on the light

to receive peace, you’re expanding your awareness of divine peace, which
will create a more peaceful condition around you; and so on. Under the
umbrella of the spiritual light, all your earthly interactions and situations are
opportunities by which you can grow and develop. Daily life becomes a
sacred experience. And as you grow, you begin to see the light of life all
around you: in the face of a friend or family member; in a moment of
adversity or in the ecstasy of inspiration; in the homeless person you greet
on your way to work every day; in all your fortunes and misfortunes.
Seeing the Aura
This is not a book about seeing auras. No book can do that. If there were a
simple way to be clairvoyant, we’d all have the spiritual sight. In fact, to see
the aura as described in this book takes years of development. In my own
case, even though I was born clairvoyant, it was many years later, and after
much training, that I could harness these spiritual gifts. Clairvoyance is a
by-product of your spiritual evolution.
I bring up this point because one of the biggest questions I am asked is,
“Does the light work for me if I can’t see it?” Of course it does! Divine
Light works for you always. Actually, you’re drawing in the light already
but probably don’t realize it. Without this spiritual energy, you couldn’t
exist. You depend on its steady flow of nourishment to keep yourself
spiritually and physically alive. This power is drawn unconsciously, similar
to the way your subconscious mind controls and regulates many of your
bodily functions.
When you first begin your light work, you may not see the energy in
activity. That’s normal and to be expected. You don’t need to see Divine
Light any more than you need to see your heart to know it’s beating. Most
people start by feeling the light as a rush of energy, a physical vibration, or
heat. Regardless of how you perceive it, Divine Light is going to start
working for you immediately. As you grow with it, you’ll become more
attuned, and the light will become your greatest ally. The majority of people
do not see energies, but they see the effects of spiritual energy in their lives,
and that’s the key. The sooner you start working with the light, the sooner
you’ll see the results. Eventually, at the right time, your spiritual vision will

open, as everyone is potentially clairvoyant. Working with spiritual energy
is immensely helpful in building the bridge to clairvoyance.
The Metaphysical Tradition
The study of the aura and spiritual energy may appear new, but it is actually
part of an ancient heritage. This ancient study is called metaphysics.
Metaphysics is the study of the spiritual root of physical life. It comes
from the ancient Greek, meaning “that which comes after the physical.” In
this way, metaphysics shares similar goals with other noble studies such as
philosophy, general spirituality, theology, mysticism, theosophy, and
ontology. Traditionally, there are two branches of metaphysics—theoretical
and practical. Theoretical metaphysics is mainly an intellectual study and is
not the subject of this book. Practical metaphysics bases its knowledge and
understanding on direct spiritual observations and experience. In its purest
form, higher metaphysics is a sacred art, practiced by trained mystics who
can see beyond the physical veil of life. The study of spiritual energy and
the aura falls into the realm of practical metaphysics. All metaphysical
references in this book refer to this practical, higher application.
There are various schools of metaphysics. The background I was trained
in is a mystical tradition known as the Kingdom of Light Teachings.
Although its roots can be found in the Judeo-Christian tradition, these
teachings are nondenominational, universal principles designed for anyone
wishing to delve into a greater understanding of the Divine Light and
metaphysics.
Definition of Terms
Here are a few basic terms we’ll be using throughout this book.
The Enlightened and Unenlightened Consciousness
Enlightened consciousness is one that is expressing divine awareness;
unenlightened consciousness does not have this spiritual awareness.

Positive and Negative Energy
In metaphysical terms, positive energy is spiritual energy charged with
divine essence. It is constructive and operates at a very high frequency. All
references to Divine Light, spiritual energy, power rays, and so forth, refer
to this constructive, positive energy. Negative energy is positive energy
corrupted through misuse. As a result, its frequency has been greatly
reduced and it has a draining and destructive effect on the aura.
Spiritual Evolution and Devolution
Evolution in metaphysics means the building up and unfolding of our soul
qualities. Devolution means the tearing down and stagnation of the soul life.
The evolution of the soul is generally not a vertical line upward. There are
highs and lows, upward and downward motion, as the soul evolves and
devolves in its growing process until it becomes strongly dedicated to the
spiritual life.
Divine—Spiritual
The word “divine” pertains directly to the world of God, our original
source. The light we speak of in this book is an abbreviated term for Divine
Light and refers to the spiritual emanations as they flow from the God
source. The word “spiritual” has its root in the Latin word spiritus (breath,
air, breath of life), but in metaphysical terminology it is actually a more
generic term. It refers to all realms that are nonphysical. In other words,
negative energy is technically still spiritual energy because it is not of
physical origin, yet because it is corrupted, it’s definitely not divine energy.
But unless stated otherwise, we’ll use the word “spiritual” interchangeably
with the word “divine” to mean the higher, pure world of God.


CHAPTER 2
ANATOMY OF THE AURA
ONE AFTERNOON WHEN I was three years old, I was playing with a favorite
red ball in our family living room. I was bouncing the ball around in all
directions, when it knocked against a piece of furniture and rolled into the
kitchen. I ran after it. My mother was at the sink washing dishes. She was
alone and happily singing to herself. I grabbed the ball and looked up to see
if she had caught me. She hadn’t seen me at all. Suddenly, as I looked at my
mother, I could see a glow of light all around her. In this glow were all
kinds of bubbly pink and lavender colors moving around. I was startled, yet
fascinated. What was this? For a moment, I thought I was dreaming. I
remembered having seen bits of color around people before, but this was so
unmistakable, so real. There was no question about it—I was seeing the
aura. At the time, I didn’t even know what it was called, but the aura has
been a part of my life ever since.
In this chapter, I would like to explore the fascinating world of the aura.
For all the years that I have been working with the energy field, I still find it
captivating. It teaches so much about ourselves and how we are all part of
an incredible spiritual process. The auric field gives us tremendous insight
into who we are as spiritual beings. The aura is crucial to our spiritual
growth because it is where we make changes in our lives first. To create any
condition, we must first have the spiritual energy present. The aura is where
we generate that spiritual power. By understanding how our aura works, we
gain a much better grasp of how to make effective and lasting
improvements.
As the anatomy of the aura is explained in this chapter, try to get a sense
of what your own aura looks like. You do not have to see it to gain an
understanding of it. By learning about its various components and how they
operate, you can ascertain where you are in your energy field even without

seeing it. This evaluation of your auric strengths and weaknesses will give
you a much better idea of where in your aura to focus the light.
The aura may be defined as an invisible (to the physical eye) vibratory
essence that surrounds all living things. Humans, animals, plants, and all
objects in nature give forth a vapor or cloud, indicative of their real
constitution. Inanimate objects also have an aura or auric emanations. A
person’s state of mind, physical health, emotional nature, and spiritual
makeup all radiate energy, which together constitute the aura.
The aura is a blueprint of our active soul qualities. It’s not the actual
soul but the expression of the soul. As we attract spiritual energy through
our various thoughts and activities, those energies register in the auric field.
Our talents, strengths, and weaknesses are all laid out in our auras. There’s
no guesswork. In physical life, we can hide our true character from others if
we choose to. In the aura, there can be no concealment or deception: our
true character is clearly visible. If we have done terrible things, those deeds
register in our aura. If we have done wonderful things, those energies will
also appear. As a result, the aura is completely consistent and reliable in
displaying our qualities and spiritual makeup.
Does everyone have an aura? The answer is emphatically yes. Every
single person on this Earth has an auric field, regardless of who he or she is.
The aura is common to everyone. The only time an aura diminishes in
power is when a person is ready to make their transition from this Earth life.
In this case, the aura does not dissipate; rather, along with the soul, it
withdraws its power from the physical plane of existence and returns to its
spiritual origin. Other than this, the aura is always active and visible.
You don’t have to actually see the aura to know its operation and power.
Most of us can feel the aura, because the aura vibrates. People say, “Oh, I
don’t like that person’s vibe.” Why? Although you may not see an aura, you
intuitively react to its energy field. As a result, a person with a rarefied aura
will feel uncomfortable around someone with a dark aura and much happier
around a person who has a similarly bright aura. Likewise, a person with a
very dark energy field will feel more at home with someone of like
vibration than with someone whose aura is very bright. The old adage “Like
attracts like” holds very true with the aura.
Most striking about the aura are its dynamic colors. Your thoughts and
feelings all radiate colors indicating the quality of thought or feeling being
expressed. These colors, to the untrained clairvoyant eye, first appear to be

random, but they’re not. Each color is there for a specific reason and as a
result of a particular way you have attracted and used the Divine Light. As
you change your mental and emotional states as well as your actions, your
aura changes accordingly. This change can sometimes be dramatic. Parts of
the aura can be tranquil as water one moment, then impulsive as flames the
next moment. Other parts change much more gradually over a long period
of time as our character changes. This dynamic quality is our saving grace.
We’re never stuck with an aura the way it is.
Shape of the Aura
The aura is not something amorphous or vague: it has definite form. For the
most part, the shape remains constant throughout our lives. Other
emanations within the aura can fluctuate, giving the appearance of
contraction and expansion, but the basic shape remains the same. This
“shell” is the basic framework in which the other aspects of the aura reside.
It might at first seem strange that the human aura would be contained in
such a defined shape or shell. Yet as we look at nature we find incredible
shapes and exquisite designs. Metaphysics has dedicated a science to the
understanding of sacred geometry.
Within the basic auric shape are bands or zones of various colors. They
look like compartments filling the shape. There are nine of these zones. The
physical body appears contained within this shell and its compartments.
These zones are stationary and their colors change very slowly. It can take a
lifetime to bring these colors into their fully illuminated state. Generally, the
upper compartments will have brighter colors, showing the enlightened
energies the person has developed, while the lower compartments will be
darker, indicating undeveloped states of consciousness that the person is
trying to bring up into a more enlightened state.
The Rounded Shape
This is not a perfect round. There is a slight oval at the top and bottom, but
it’s mostly round. (See Illustration 2.1A.) The top is approximately six
inches above the head and extends a little beyond arm’s length. The outer

rim is usually silver or gold but can change according to the needs of the
individual. The rounded aura shows a soul in the process of gradual
spiritual growth.
The Squared Shape
The square-shaped aura is actually slightly larger than the rounded aura and
literally looks like the person is in a cube. (See Illustration 2.1B.) The
physical body is slightly off center within the shell, with more room at the
bottom than at the top. The square-shaped aura can show a devolving state
of consciousness. We are not born with an auric shape like this. Over time
and with repeated misuse, our auras can change from the rounded shape
into this squared shape. The square-shaped aura can also represent the
primitive aura. Souls who are still in the infancy of their spiritual
unfoldment will have a square-shaped aura. In this situation the aura is not
devolved at all. The square indicates the foundation energy helping the soul
build its spiritual power. In this scenario, other bright energies help
differentiate this type of soul from the devolved aura, which would have
much darker, menacing energies.
The Pointed Oval Shape
The pointed-oval-shaped aura is pointed at both top and bottom. (See
Illustration 2.1C.) It’s about as wide as the rounded aura but reaches up
about twenty-four inches above the head and below the feet. The pointed
oval shape is the mark of a spiritual master. The circumference is usually
gold for protection. A person with this shape of aura is either very near to or
has reached his or her enlightened self.
Divisions of the Aura
Many people think of the aura as splashes of colors and symbols when, in
fact, the aura is a vast, intricate manifestation, just as we are. Nowhere can
this intricacy be more clearly seen than in the auric divisions. The divisions

may be seen in and around the auric shell. They cover a broad spectrum of
your nature, and together comprise the sum total of your character traits. By
improving the qualities of these divisions, you can vastly improve the
corresponding quality of your life.
Three Auric Shapes : ILLUSTRATION 2.1
Health Division

The health division takes in the entire physical makeup, including all
organs, glands, tissues, and one’s general condition.
This division has health lines, or striations, that move out from the
physical body to the perimeter of the auric shell on both the right and the
left side. (See color Illustration 2.2A.) These health lines help supply the
physical body with the spiritual energy it needs to function properly. When
a person is in excellent health, these striations come through in very strong
silvery white energies that shimmer. They are exceptionally beautiful to see
in this condition and immediately demonstrate that one is in radiant health.
When a person falls ill, the health lines start to lose some of their luster and
change to a dull metal gray. If someone is very ill, the lines become dull and
droop closer to the body, depending on the severity of the illness. And when
a person is approaching death, the health lines will droop very close to the
body and continue to deteriorate to a dark metal-gray energy. In this
condition, the person is ready to depart from the physical body.

Divisions of the Aura, Health Division: Illustration 2.2 A. Health Division
In addition to health lines, the physical body itself radiates an aura of
about two inches along its contours. You will see reds and oranges when the
body is robust and strong. The miracle of the aura does not stop there. Each
organ in the body has its own aura! Healthy organs usually have a rosy hue,
while sick organs will have a dull gray aura around them.
Mental Division

This division, which also goes by the term “mental body,” deals with your
thinking. Thoughts are among the easiest of areas to disturb in the aura, and
therefore one of the most important areas to keep alert and clear. The mental
division is one of the primary areas of the aura on which to begin work. The
energies of the mental division may be seen moving in and around the head.
(See color Illustration 2.2B.) There are many energies connected to the
mental division and these can vary with the individual. Yet there are some
energies that are basic to a healthy mental division. Often there is a gold
band, giving power and strength to the mental body, above the head. A glow
of lemon yellow light around the upper part of the head like a halo indicates
the intellectual capacity of the individual. This is common to every aura. In
the average person, this energy will radiate a few inches from the head, but
with a mental giant or a genius it can extend quite a bit farther. Just above
the head, silver diamond points of light indicate intelligence.

Divisions of the Aura, Health Division: Illustration 2.2 B. Mental Division
In the center of the forehead is the mental energy center. This center is
part of the mental division and it radiates an energy corresponding to the
quality of a person’s thoughts. Most of us move back and forth from
enlightened to unenlightened thoughts, with the two sometimes bumping
into each other. Many times, we don’t even know when we’re in the
unenlightened state. We sense the confusion or disorientation but don’t
identify it as unenlightened thinking. We generally know when we are in the
enlightened state because there is such bliss involved.

Emotional Division
This division is located in and around the abdominal area and extends to the
outermost part of the aura. (See color Illustration 2.2C.) The emotional
division is the total makeup of your emotional nature—good, bad, or
indifferent. If you are angry, dark red energies will shoot out like
firecrackers and can extend quite far if the outburst is very intense. If you
are in love, beautiful fuchsias and pinks will radiate. The feeling nature is
an intense, powerful influence in the aura. Too often, we act out of our
feeling nature without allowing our mind levels to direct our lives. We all
know how feelings can color the mind. The emotional division acts as an
anchor for the aura, balancing the whole auric field. Someone who is a
master of his or her emotions will have very bright, radiant oranges, pinks,
greens, or blues in this division. These energies will move out quite a bit
farther than the mental radiations. The emotional center is in the middle of
this division.

Divisions of the Aura, Health Division: Illustration 2.2 C. Emotional Division
With someone who’s very destructive emotionally, there can be dark
browns and greens and even black, showing intense hatred. The energies in
a volatile emotional condition move contrary to their natural flow. Notice
the expressions “sick to my stomach” and “gut-wrenching.” The emotional
“gauge” lies within the solar plexus.
For most people the emotional division is a mixed bag, including both
positive and negative emotions. Someone may have the love flow, which
brings in the pinks, but may be very jealous, which would move in dirty,
avocado green energy. Like the mental division, it’s critical to keep this

division as clean and clear as possible, so you don’t dissipate your spiritual
power.
Magnetic Division
This division is very interesting because it shows the creative talents and
abilities of an individual. Its center of energy may be seen on the left side of
the chest, a little above the heart. (See color Illustration 2.2D.) It is round in
shape, similar to the energy centers. It’s about two inches in diameter and
peacock blue in color. From this blue point, rays of light shoot out when the
division is active.

Divisions of the Aura, Health Division: Illustration 2.2 D. Magnetic Division (Talents & Abilities)
The magnetic division reveals to what degree a person has developed
talents and abilities. If bright electric blues and oranges are radiating from
this point, it means the person is actively using his or her abilities. For
example, if a person is an excellent pianist and actively playing, the energy
coming out of the magnetic division will be bright and radiant. On the other
hand, if that person has neglected the piano, the energies will become dull.
The talent is there, but inactive. One must use his or her particular gifts—
otherwise, the energy will fade.

Geniuses have a very pronounced magnetic division because they are
using their gifts to a high degree. The talent and abilities expressed can be
in any area, including music, literature, art, medicine, engineering, physics,
computer science—you name it.
Color Division
Interpenetrating the other divisions, the color division reveals character
traits of an individual. About eight inches thick, it forms an oval shape that
extends from about eighteen inches to two feet all the way around the
person. (See color Illustration 2.2E.) The colors in this division move in
small pinpoints of light that resemble heat rising from a sidewalk on a hot
day. These points of light are so thick you can barely see through this
division when really focusing on it. In the color division of an enlightened
aura, these points of light sparkle in a rainbow of pearl luster colors, making
the whole aura iridescent and creating a euphoric effect. As we work on
bettering ourselves, this division brightens.

Divisions of the Aura, Health Division: Illustration 2.2 E. Color Division (Character Traits)
This division reveals the importance of building character. Every time
you strengthen a facet of your nature or better yourself in some way, you
brighten this division. Even if you are not receiving acknowledgment from
others, your goodness shows in your aura and becomes part of your life
expression.
Spiritual Division

The spiritual division reveals the spiritual advancement of an individual.
This division is seen about two feet above the head in arcing bands of light.
(See color Illustration 2.2F.) There are seven of these bands. They are about
a half-inch thick, fanning out in various pearl luster colors and creating the
effect of a rainbow. We all have these spiritual bands to varying degrees of
intensity. They are the accumulation of spiritual light we have earned in our
evolution. The brighter these bands of light, the more we have advanced
spiritually. The colors can move into pale pinks, lemon yellows, and light
greens. In a very advanced individual, a pronounced indigo shows up in one
of these bands. It’s a beautiful sight to behold and one of my favorite
aspects of the aura to watch.

Divisions of the Aura, Health Division: Illustration 2.2 F. Spiritual Division
The Inner Aura
In addition to the spiritual aura, there is another aspect to the energy field—
an inner aura. This inner aura is also known as the “soul aura.” The soul
aura is a sacred part of you. It is deeply involved in your evolution and
helps you to reach your highest spiritual potential. It reflects some of the
deepest aspects of the soul energy.

While the “outer” aura explored in this book gives you the power to
create and interact with the world, your inner aura gives your soul the
power to evolve. The inner or soul aura surrounds the body and radiates
about a foot in all directions. This aura is intense to see and reflects the life
lessons the soul comes to Earth to learn.
You are born with a certain configuration of this inner auric power. This
configuration gives you the power to master the lessons of your incarnated
life. When you come to Earth, you have many things to learn. However, one
overriding lesson dominates many of the various soul experiences. It may
be your soul lesson to learn patience or to be more dynamic or to express
your creative gifts more fully, to be more tolerant, and so on. This basic
lesson will be a running theme in your life. For example, if your basic
lesson is patience, this inner aura might be emerald green, giving you the
power to be patient. If you are meant to learn determination and devotion,
your inner aura might be a beautiful royal blue. A pink inner aura indicates
the key lesson to learn is love. A white inner aura shows someone who’s
meant to express purity in life and not settle for less. As your soul learns
this essential lesson, the inner aura brightens until the lesson is learned and
the soul has absorbed the spiritual power. If you do not learn your life
lesson, then this inner aura weakens.
Thought Forms
Thought forms are concentrated pockets of energy produced as a direct
result of concentrated thinking, feeling, words, and actions. When you think
about something intensely, for example, your aura will attract and radiate an
energy that corresponds to the quality of that thought. If you consistently
think that thought over and over again, you will create a thought form of
energy. For example, if you think about someone you love, your loving
thoughts could produce a deep rose pink energy. If these thoughts persist,
this loving energy will produce an actual thought form of love. That form
will take the particular quality of the love expressed. I’ve seen love thought
forms take the shape of pink bubbles or pink and gold winglike forms.
They’re beautiful to see. The wonderful thing about these created forms is
when they’re on the positive side, they become like good friends.
Enlightened forms enhance and beautify our aura.

Thought forms are seen floating in and around the aura. Sometimes they
are static and other times they have a life of their own. The shapes can vary
from vague, amorphous, cloudlike forms to distinct, recognizable forms.
The quality of the form is dependent on the way the form was generated.
For example, take a student who’s trying to decide what college to go to.
The student feels intense focus on finding the right school but confusion
and indecision as to which one. The intense focus would create a light
yellowish thought form, but because the focus has no clear direction, the
shape would be a simple roundish light somewhat resembling an apple. It
would have color and form but no detail. On the other hand, a focused
thought can create a very definite form. I once saw a quill-like form, a
beautiful pointed and feathered gold and turquoise thought form, around the
head of a friend of mine. He was determined to make this certain
investment which he knew would make him money. He was so determined
and clear about what he wanted, he produced this attractive form. These
forms are not unusual. I’ve literally seen musical notes around well-studied
musicians.
What you have to watch out for are thought forms created as a result of
destructive thinking, feeling, and acting. You can create some grotesque and
devitalizing energies in your aura this way, which can act like unruly
children. For example, a strong outburst of anger, such as seen in the
illustrations in Chapter 3, can create dark red energies like firecrackers all
over the aura. These emotional forms can take two weeks to clear out of the
aura, and that’s just one single outburst! If a person were in a continuous
state of rage, he or she would be creating and building up some very
unhealthy forms faster than the aura could release them. Compounding the
problem, one unenlightened form tends to create another. If I’m angry a
great deal, this could turn into a hatred that could create a black cloudlike
thought form around the head.
Understanding the Energy Centers (Chakras)
Now we come to one of the most important aspects of the aura, especially
as it relates to working with spiritual energy. These are the energy centers,
or chakras.

In the aura, there is a linking up of spiritual power through energy
centers. Many people use the Sanskrit word for the energy centers: chakra,
meaning “wheel of light” or “wheel of force.” Actually, the centers are
spheres of light, sparking out rays of various colors. The centers look like
miniature suns, varying in size from about two and a half to three inches in
diameter, with a pearl nucleus of light in the center. Their color is basically
gold, but each one has its own dominant color particular to its individual
purpose and character. They can also appear to be multicolored because of
the energies that move in and out of them.
These energy centers are vital in the process of spiritual transformation
because they are where you will be making changes in your aura first.
When you draw light into your aura, the first place the light makes contact
is in these energy centers. If the aura is the first place you make changes in
your life, the chakras are the first place you make changes in your aura. In
working with the Divine Light, you will become intimately acquainted with
the operation of these points.
Each center is responsible for a different aspect of your consciousness,
activity, and spiritual expression. They are given when you are born and
they stay throughout your life. The reason you have these points is to
receive and transmit energy, and you’re constantly doing one or the other.
These centers are focal points of the tremendous power moving in and out
of you.
When these centers are in alignment, they will spin in a clockwise
motion (as seen by an outsider facing you). (See Illustration 5.2 in Chapter
5.) If one or more of the centers is spinning in a counterclockwise direction,
then there is disharmony, which can throw off the balance of the other
centers and diminish the power and accuracy of the energy being received
and transmitted.
In understanding the chakra system, it’s important to be aware that each
human soul embodies more than one set of chakras. These various chakra
systems correspond to different auric manifestations. In this book, we are
focusing on the master chakra system of the spiritual aura that controls the
others. The Tibetan and Indian schools of metaphysics, which have long
directed great attention to the chakras, often emphasize another chakra
system connected to the etheric aspects of the aura. These etheric chakras
have their own functions in the consciousness, including helping the
spiritual aspirant understand the inner life of his or her being. By placing

attention on these etheric centers, the soul can discover aspects of its inner
nature that would be otherwise inaccessible. Such contemplative states may
lead to moments of heightened awareness. There are stories of yogis
entering blissful states by contemplating the beauty of the opened crown
chakra, for example.
The chakras are essential in your spiritual evolution as it is through
these chakras that you forge your spiritual mettle. They are indispensable in
your light work and have an immediate effect on your life. Improving the
flow of light through these centers will facilitate swift improvements in
your outer world.
The number, basic appearance, and location of these centers are the
same for everyone. Some of the earliest illustrations of these centers, which
again came from the East, focused on seven main centers lined up in a
straight line from the base of the spine to the top of the head; all had either a
floweror a disklike appearance. This was a somewhat symbolic
representation of the etheric chakra system and not intended to be taken
literally. It was the way early spiritual writers chose to teach the principles
of the chakras. I have tried to illustrate these centers exactly the way I see
them, without symbolic embellishment. (See Illustration 2.3.)
The Crown Chakra—the Spirit Self
Most books on chakras will point to the top of the head as the location of
this center, but in the spiritual aura chakra system, this point is actually
about six inches above the head. The crown chakra reveals how awakened a
soul is in its spirit self. For most people, the crown chakra is closed. The
majority of us haven’t yet reached that state of consciousness of being
spiritually awake. When this center is closed, it is oval shaped, like the bud
of a flower that hasn’t opened, and pure white. It does not rotate or radiate
energy. There’s nothing wrong with the center being in this state. You can
be fully active in life. It just means that you haven’t started awakening to
your spirit self yet.
As a soul begins to evolve and awaken spiritually, the crown chakra, or
the “thousand-petal lotus,” as it is also called, begins to unfold. Petals of
Divine Light begin to slowly and gracefully unfold, and the center becomes
glorious to behold. Its petals shoot out about eighteen to twenty inches

upward and outward, very much like a lotus blossom. The predominant
colors are white and gold. In this condition, it resembles a crown sitting on
the upper part of the aura, and it makes an unmistakable statement as to
where you are in your spiritual development.
It takes time and effort to open this center: no matter how you may
meditate or pray, this point cannot open until you have earned that power
and vibration. When you improve yourself and work with the light, the
crown chakra will unfold gradually. One interesting note: when the soul
passes on from this world through the process we call death, it leaves
through the crown chakra.
The Mental Center—the Conscious Mind
The mental center is the nucleus of your conscious thinking self. This
energy point, located in the center of the forehead, is esoterically called the
Trinity Chalice. The center is gold in color and about three inches in
diameter. Within this center is a triangle of a lighter golden hue with a
beautiful point of white light in the center. The center spins quickly because
of all the activity going on, but the triangle remains stationary.
The mental center is a hub of intense activity. It’s constantly receiving
and transmitting thoughts, and these thoughts are extremely potent. This
energy point sends power to the other energy centers, especially the
emotional center. When thoughts are in the enlightened flows, the
connection between emotion and thinking and the subconscious levels will
be working successfully. When the thinking level is very high, silvery
sparkles move out of the mental center. This is indicative of a quick,
intelligent, and aware mind. There is usually a pronounced amount of
lemon yellow as well.
As the crown chakra is above the head, the mental center is the highest
point of light within the body, which makes it the gateway to higher or
lower levels of consciousness. The mental center is the director of your
conscious mind. The mind is the navigator of the soul. Through the mental
center you receive inspiration from the higher mind and express those ideas
through the power of your intellectual self. Please note: the mental center is
not the same thing as the “third eye”—these are different facets of your
consciousness, just as your brain is different from your eyes.

The Throat Center—the Power of Your Words
Esoterically known as the Eternal Ego, the throat center is located,
appropriately, in the middle of the throat. It, too, is a golden sphere about
three inches in diameter, slightly smaller than the mental center, with a
magnificent royal blue diamond-shaped nucleus.
Through this center, you project the power of your word. Your words
radiate tremendous spiritual power. You may think you’re just making
sounds, but behind those sounds is potent spiritual power. This is why you
must be very careful about the words you speak and to choose your words
thoughtfully. Aim to say the right word at the right time.
The spiritual energy that radiates out of this center moves in one of two
ways: spiritual tone or harsh sound. When you speak in spiritual tone, it
means there is divine power in the words you speak. These uplifting tones
can move out in vibrant royal blue energy and other shades of blue
emanating from the diamond nucleus. These energies can stream out about
a foot and a half in all directions. Great singers like Enrico Caruso, or
inspired orators such as Ralph Waldo Emerson, will have this blue moving
out from their throat center.
When you speak hurtful or destructive words, the spiritual energy
moves out in harsh sound. This means there is little or no spiritual vitality in
the words spoken. The energy can move out in broken and jagged rays. The
colors will vary according to the type of destructive words spoken but they
are unenlightened, dirty colors. I’ve seen avocado green energy of deceit
emanating from someone who was trying to cheat another person of money.
The deceitful energy moved out in a snakelike form from the throat chakra,
illustrating how intense destructive words can be. It is important to bring
more purity, love, and idealism to the spoken word.
The Hermetic Center (Heart Center)—the Nucleus of Your
Personal Affairs
This center is in the middle of the chest and is commonly known as the
heart center. In this book, we will use the term “Hermetic center,” following
the traditions of mystical teachings. This center is gold with a brilliant
emerald green point in the middle. It’s the largest center in the body.

The Energy Centers (Chakras) : ILLUSTRATION 2.3
The Hermetic center deals with your personal world affairs—how you
energetically interact with the outer world. This includes persons, places,
things, and situations. That’s quite a bit! In the aura, there are twelve
avenues to your human earthly affairs and within the Hermetic center there
are twelve related power rays. These rays resemble spokes on a wheel.
Seven of these avenues pertain to your day-to-day affairs and are called the
seven solar rays. They are represented by the colors green, blue, turquoise,
gold, white, pink, and red. Then there are five mystical rays that are related
to five mystical avenues of your spiritual expression. They are of heavenly

colors not found in the physical spectrum and to the clairvoyant eye appear
white.
This center reflects the things that are happening in your life and
activities you are initiating. It also expresses your true motivation for the
things you are doing. For example, if you are ambitious and strive to be
your best and highest self, there will be a brilliant bright orange energy
emanating from this center. You need to have ambition and drive to
accomplish your goals and aspirations. But if you are ruthlessly ambitious,
where you pursue your goal no matter what the cost to other souls, the
energy emanating from the Hermetic center will degrade to a dirty burnt
orange energy, indicating the selfish motives. On the other hand, if you are
afraid to take a chance to reach your goals and do not try at all, then the
energy can move to a gray color, revealing worry and apprehension.
It is important to protect this center from undue pressures of the world.
It can feel overburdened when you take too much to heart and try to carry
all the world’s woes. Strive to be “in the world, but not of the world.”
Involve yourself and be keenly aware of what is happening, but refuse to
claim its troubles as your own.
The Hermetic center is known as the “seat of the soul.” This is because
when the soul incarnates in physical life, its nucleus of expression is the
Hermetic center. Within the Hermetic center there is a sacred energy point
which is a connecting link to the soul. This contact point is known as the
“holy of holies.” It can be seen within the emerald green nucleus and looks
like a golden white point of light. This inner point of light is your doorway
to the inner realm. Since this center is the seat of the soul, it keenly
responds to how the soul feels. Joy, exhilaration, love, sadness, weariness,
anxiety, frustration, disappointment, depression—these all affect the
Hermetic center. As a result of this connection, your life experiences
register more deeply in the heart center than perhaps anywhere else.
The Emotional Center—Your Feeling Nature
Located just above the navel, this center is esoterically known as the
Spiritual Heart. It is the second-largest center in the body, after the
Hermetic center, and it is gold with a beautiful deep rose pink nucleus. It
rotates at moderate speed.

This center deals with your emotions. In the aura, emotions are the
engine that gives life to your thoughts. A thought with emotion behind it is
very potent and will propel the soul to action. This is a crucial chakra for
sending Divine Light to, to keep the emotional nature uplifted and in a
positive, constructive place. Unfortunately, this chakra is usually the
weakest part of a person’s aura. Many people don’t know how to effectively
express their emotional life. They too often let emotions get the better of
them. This is why it’s so important to develop a healthy emotional life so
the feeling and thinking blend well together in high positive flows. If you
are in a good place emotionally, there will be beautiful streams of pinks,
oranges, and reds emanating from the pink nucleus.
The Spleen Center—the Vitalizing Chakra
This point is not a center in the same way the others are, but rather a very
important focal point of energy. The spleen center is about two and a half
inches in diameter and is located on the left side of the body, concurrent to
where the physical spleen is. It’s orange in color with a golden nucleus of
light, and it spins in a clockwise direction at a slower speed than the
Hermetic center.
The spleen center is a distributor of energy. One of its big jobs is to
receive and distribute the sun’s energy throughout the physical body,
especially the bloodstream. It’s also a storage place for solar rays, so that
when we need energy, it can be called upon. Some metaphysical schools
refer to this chakra as a second sun because of its life-giving properties.
This point is responsible for helping to keep the physical body vital and full
of stamina. It also brings in harmony and joy. When it’s in a healthy state,
red, orange, and gold light shoot out from the nucleus of this center. Lots of
sunshine will benefit the spleen center.
The Root Chakra—Your Creative Drive
The root chakra is located at the base of the spine toward the tailbone and is
actually easier to see from the side or the back. It’s gold in color with a
carnation red nucleus of light. This point does not rotate but remains
stationary. Its flow of energy is different from that of the other centers. This

chakra has three important functions. One function is to deal with
experiences of the past. These are memories that are still being carried in
the consciousness and need to be worked out. The root chakra holds the
excrement, or the refuse, of our unenlightened thoughts and deeds. In this
way, the root chakra is the means through which the unenlightened atoms
are released from the aura. The root chakra periodically needs cleansing as
it can become congested if you have been hanging on to disturbing
energies. Once cleared, the root chakra is a powerful ally.
Another job the root chakra does is harness a spiritual power
appropriately called the root chakra energy. This energy appears bright red
when healthy. The root chakra energy stimulates your creative drive. As
children of the divine, we are all inherently creative. It’s part of the nature
of life itself. This root chakra energy is not the actual talent you may have
(which is expressed through different aspects of the aura, such as the
magnetic division), but it amplifies the urge, the drive to create.
A natural flow of this root energy is for sexual expression. This energy
is part of the creative expression of sexual intimacy between couples. It is
an essential power in the holy act of conceiving children. Yet this power can
be used in other ways as well. It can be redirected to move into creative
acts, such as designing inventions or artistic creations. The root chakra
energy can be redirected to move into purely spiritual endeavors, such as in
the unfoldment of your divine nature. This is where the spiritual expression
“going down into lower Egypt” or “coming up out of lower Egypt” comes
from. The root chakra plays an important role in building up the spiritual
drive needed to ascend from your lower nature to your higher, divine
nature.
Unfortunately, this root chakra energy can be misused and corrupted.
The bright red can turn to a dirty maroon red, indicating an overly
indulgent, lustful nature. If someone really perverts the sexual energy, the
root chakra energy can move downward instead of upward, in a dark
maroon red, indicating the energy is moving in a devolving momentum and
is degrading rather than enhancing the aura.
The root chakra works with another well-known energy called
kundalini. Kundalini is a spiraling, serpent-like energy rising upward along
the spine. Kundalini is a spiritual power already within us. The purpose of
this energy is to strengthen and energize the spiritual centers. This energy
slowly awakens in the consciousness as a soul evolves. It is famously

connected to the process of spiritual enlightenment and for this reason it
holds a special allure for the spiritual aspirant.
As part of your spiritual growth, the kundalini opens slowly and
naturally without any conscious effort. The soul is slowly earning the vital
power of the kundalini. This way, the person is able to handle the kundalini
energy and its unfolding becomes a beautiful, sublime experience.
Some metaphysical schools teach opening the kundalini by conscious
effort. This training was intended for the advanced spiritual student and was
not intended as an exercise for casual or everyday use. Kundalini is a
spiritual fire. Like any fire, physical or spiritual, when used correctly it can
be of great benefit. Yet when mishandled, it can be the cause of great
distress. In my own training and experience, I have found tampering with
the kundalini directly to be unnecessary and potentially dangerous. I have
counseled people who were severely traumatized because they managed to
open the kundalini to a certain degree prematurely. They were seeking
instant spiritual illumination but found out the hard way that that’s not the
way it works. And this is not necessary. The beauty is, the kundalini opens
in its own time and rhythm, without conscious intervention, as you work
with the Divine Light.
Energy Center Radiations
Flowing out of your energy centers are various types of emanations. These
radiations show the variety of activities within each center. In developing
the aura, your main purpose is to elevate and enlighten the quality of these
radiations. There are many types of energy radiations, but there are four
foundational types of energy center radiations.

Energy Center Radiations: Illustration 2.4
Active Emanations
Active emanations look like rays of sunlight radiating from the nucleus of
the chakra point. Generally, they are seen as straight rays of light, but they
can take a great variety of forms, as you will see in many of the illustrations
throughout this book. The colors can run the gamut, from the highest white
to the blackest black, and everything in between. These rays fluctuate the
most of the four principal chakra emanation types. They can be like a

snapshot of where a person is in his or her consciousness at any given time.
Remember, some aspects of the aura change slowly over time. Other
aspects of the aura can change quickly as your thoughts, words, actions, and
emotions change. Active emanations can change quickly. These are often
the most expressive indicators of a person’s immediate state of
consciousness.
Stabilizers
Stabilizers help keep the flow of energy moving steadily. They move out in
three to four straight rays and are gold in color. (See color Illustration
2.4A.) They stay the same color regardless of what’s happening to the
individual. Because there is so much power moving in and out of the
centers, it is essential to keep the points steady to keep the consciousness
steady.

Energy Center Radiations: A. Stabilizers
Fanning Rays
Fanning rays are among the chakras’ most beautiful emanations. They shoot
out from the nucleus to either side in a solid color of light. (See color
Illustration 2.4B.) The extent of their radiation depends on the development
of the person and they begin to appear in the aura after a person has reached
seven years of age.

Energy Center Radiations: B: Fanning Rays
Fanning rays are seen in the mental, Hermetic, and emotional centers.
They show the tendency of expression. Whereas active emanations can
change quickly depending on what you are doing at any given time, fanning
rays will stay the same color unless the whole direction of energy changes.
For example, say a person has a pink fanning ray radiating from the
emotional center, demonstrating a loving nature. This person can still have
days when he or she feels irritable and out of sorts. This doesn’t necessarily
mean that the emotional fanning ray will change color, because the thrust of

the person is still to be loving. But if that person were to become irritable
on a regular basis, then the fanning ray would change color.
Spiral Rays
Spiral rays spin with the movement of the center and reflect the spiritual
progress of the individual. (See color Illustration 2.4C.) At birth, these
radiations are white and gold in color. After seven years of age, they begin
to develop, and they continue to develop throughout life.

Energy Center Radiations: C: Spiral Rays
Exploring Mixed, Devolved, and Enlightened
Auras
Let us now put together all aspects of the aura that we’ve been exploring
and look at the energy field as a whole. Of course, there are as many
variations in auras as there are people, but in my experience, auras fall into
three broad categories. Also please note that even with clairvoyant sight,
you do not see all of the auric anatomy at one time, as it would be too
confusing. A trained clairvoyant learns to spiritually focus on specific
aspects of the aura at one time, almost like tuning into a specific radio
station and not the others. Yet for the sake of these illustrations we are
putting together a composite of the auric power.
The Mixed Aura
The majority of humans have mixed auras. Even souls that are higher on the
spiritual ladder will have the mixed aura until they near the spiritual
pinnacle. The mixed aura has a rounded shape and has both positive and
negative energies active at the same time. (See color Illustration 2.5.)

The Mixed Aura: Illlustration 2.5
A soul with this type of aura is in the process of evolving and is going
through the normal human condition in all its vicissitudes. And isn’t this the
human conundrum, the good and the not so good living side by side? The
soul with a mixed aura might be that of a fine artist who has a drinking
problem, or someone who is very smart and inventive but also selfish and
mean, or a person who is fundamentally good, yet weak-willed and gullible.
Variations are endless. The good news with the mixed aura is that it holds
more enlightened than unenlightened energies. Over time, it becomes the

job of the soul with the mixed aura to use the enlightened parts of that aura
to transform the unenlightened parts until all are in Divine Light.
In the illustration here, the soul is on an upward swing and has many
redeeming qualities. The light green band of light to her left shows she’s
growing spiritually. This band of green is often around people who have
awakened to the spiritual life and are learning spiritual truths. The gold
pyramid above her head shows she is searching for truth. The pink bubbles
of light to the right show she is in love with someone. But the energy is not
very strong, which usually means the love is one-sided and the other person
is not returning her affections.
This soul also has creative energies. The winged forms above her head
show inspired enlightened thoughts; the light blue formation to the left
shows creative vibrations. However, its position indicates that she has not
yet expressed this creative power. Vitality is apparent in the red energy
coming from her hands, and good health is shown by the bright health lines
moving out from either side of her body. Emanations of blue coming from
her throat center tell us that she speaks positively; purple waves of light at
her feet show she has overcome some tragedy or adversity. Her color
division is clear with bright colors, and her spiritual division is fairly bright
—she has developed spiritual powers somewhere in her evolution.
At the same time, this soul has plenty to work out of. Most prominent is
the dark green cloud formation to her right, showing that this person is
actively expressing jealousy. The gray compartment in the lower part of her
aura shows she’s overcoming a lot of fear from earlier in her life. The
brown compartment harbors pettiness, suggesting that she can be mean at
times, but is working out of this as well.
From this stage of spiritual development, we eventually realize the
enlightened state. However, if we refuse to express our higher nature and
choose to walk away from the light, we can fall into the next auric
expression—the devolved aura.
The Devolved Aura
This square-shaped aura reflects a soul that has consistently misused its
spiritual powers. As a result, many of the energies have been corrupted.
(See color Illustration 2.6.) Such an aura has become square-shaped

because, by its persistent refusal to connect with its higher nature, it has
retarded its evolution and reverted back to a more primitive, instinctual
state of consciousness. The dark energies have restricted and choked the
spiritual flow to the point where little Divine Light can get through. During
the sixties, the expression “He’s a square” was often used. Ironically,
someone really can be a square! In contrast with the mixed aura, the
challenge with the devolved aura is the person has created more
unenlightened energy than enlightened energy in the aura. The things he is
doing take him further away from his spiritual source rather than toward it.
We are not born with an aura like this. As the auric power is degraded over
time, we devolve to this spiritual level. This soul has a long climb back into
the light, not only because of all the work needed to redeem it, but also
because living in the dark propels it on to ever darker thoughts and deeds.
The person with such a soul could be a tyrant or mass murderer, but doesn’t
have to be. I have seen this aura around what you would call “normal”
people who hold no conspicuous positions in life.

The Devolved Aura: Illustration 2.6
I would like to note here that the square-shaped aura can indicate a
young, primitive human soul in the early stages of its evolution. However,
in contrast to the devolved aura, the energies of the primitive aura are
brighter and much better balanced. The physical form is centered and the
cube-shaped aura acts as a foundation energy to build spiritual power. It’s a
very different scenario from when the squared shape is the result of a
spiritual devolution.
The devolved aura seen in the illustration is very muddled; the lower
half is especially disorganized. The black compartment holds sustained

hatred, which he has tried to control. It may also indicate that he has been
involved in murder.
The dark green and brown compartments on the lower left indicate a
conniving, cheating nature, compounded by cruelty. His emotions are all
mixed up. There’s a lot of anger, shown by the blotchy energy to his left at
the emotional division. The health lines are turning gray and beginning to
droop at the bottom, which means that his misdeeds are leading to physical
illness. The head area has a brownish yellow energy, showing pettiness and
a lethargic quality to his thinking. The dark green shooting from his
forehead shows he is planning some sort of deception. The black thought
forms around his aura show hatred toward someone that has recently been
expressed. The dark, dirtied blue compartment across his head area shows
he’s constantly moody and brooding over his life. The sparkles of his color
division are much smaller than in the color division of the mixed aura, and
many of the points of light are dulled and dirtied. Notice, too, that the
energies radiating from his centers are filled with darker colors and do not
reach as far as with the mixed aura. This shows he’s in an active state of
depression. His spiritual division remains unaffected, but he has no access
to those powers until he turns his life around.
Despite his condition, there are some bright colors in this aura. A lemon
yellow energy compartment above his head shows intelligence and a strong
mind when it isn’t clouded by wrongdoings. Red and orange compartments
across his torso show he is energetic and motivated. These areas of energy
and motivation are often the most redeeming qualities in the devolved aura.
The purple compartment on the lower left side of his aura shows he can be
calm when necessary. Bright green and gold rays shoot out from the center
of his chest, indicating he is active in world affairs, and probably
successful. And isn’t that often the case? Very destructive people can be
quite successful in the work world and financial arena even though they are
far from living life correctly. This often confuses people around them into
believing that their actions are meritorious.
Fortunately, a soul in such a devolved state is something of a rarity. I
have seen maybe a hundred devolved auras in my life, but that’s a hundred
too many. A soul like this is certainly not past redemption, but it has a lot of
work ahead to turn things around.

The Enlightened Aura
In sharp contrast to the devolved aura is the enlightened aura. The
enlightened aura is the ideal we all aspire to. In building your ideal image of
the things you most want in life, this is the auric image to visualize in your
heart and mind.
The evolved aura has the beautiful pointed oval shape. (See color
Illustration 2.7.) There is an outer gold aura that can radiate an additional
two feet, creating a feeling of great expansion. All components of this aura
are in full operation, well developed, and organized. Its colors are in the
high pearl luster ranges and are moving in beautiful flows and striations.
The compartments of the auric shell are clear, definite, and well organized.
Notice the gold in the upper compartment, showing the high spiritual state
of this soul. In addition to the pointed shape, a striking feature of the
enlightened aura is a lack of dark colors. This doesn’t mean the person with
this type of aura is perfect. Unenlightened energies can and do show up, and
a person with this type of aura is still developing and strengthening his or
her character. But it does mean this soul has reached a magnificent level of
spiritual maturity and perfection. Every soul, no matter how developed, is
in a continual process of spiritually evolving. Enlightenment is a process
that unfolds in many degrees. Yet without question, a soul like this has
reached a pinnacle of human achievement, one we all aspire to. The
illustration here can only hint at the beauty of such an auric field.

The Enlightened Aura: Illustration 2.7
A halo of lemon yellow light filled with diamond points shows the keen
intelligence this person has. There are triangles inside each main spiritual
center, signifying that the centers are working at optimal power. Notice the
expanse of radiations coming from these centers: they reach almost to the
edge of the auric shell. These beautiful flows show he has control over his
mental and emotional nature and is living his life in ways that only add
more light to his aura. The crown chakra, above the head, is fully opened,
displaying the glorious thousand-petal lotus flower shape that reveals the

soul’s state of enlightenment. This soul is fully awakened in its spiritual
nature and is fully aware of its purpose on Earth.
Enlightened thought forms are all around this aura. The white stars to
his left show purity of thought. This person’s mind is completely focused on
God. This man has spent untold time refining and developing his divine
attributes. The beautiful formation to his right shows he is in pursuit of a
spiritual mission, a higher purpose. This soul, if not already a master of life,
is very close to that level. The purple at his feet expresses the tremendous
peace and spiritual stability this soul has attained. The color division is
similar to that of the rounded aura, but the colors are now primarily gold
and purple. The bands of light above his head are very bright and vibrant.
This person is a blessing to be around and creates good wherever they go.
From here, the aura can expand even further, for perfection is never static:
we grow “from grace to grace.”
I have seen such an aura maybe a handful of times in my life, yet it is
the destiny of all of us to have such an aura.
Types of Auras
Within these three auric types are infinite possibilities of auric emanations.
Depending on character, development, desires, and talents, each aura is
going to take on its own quality. For example, around a schoolteacher
would be a prominent lemon yellow energy because of all the concentrated
study involved. Silver would also be seen because intelligence is part of the
profession.
The aura of athletes would show more red and orange energies because
they are active physically. Someone who works more in the creative aspect
of things, such as music or art, is going to run a little of the gamut of
spiritual energies. Actors express a lot of the emotional aspects of their
nature and that will come through strongly in the solar plexus area of the
aura. The hues will vary depending on whether they are doing comedy or
drama. Powder blue light will often be seen with creative people. The aura
of a newborn baby is wonderful to see. It usually has a lot of green and
violet in it. A fascinating characteristic about a baby’s aura is that it has no
dark energies in it. It’s as if they are given a clean slate to make good in the
world.

In the case of a leader, such as the president of a country, a variety of
energies will be pronounced. If he or she is a strong leader, this person will
have a lot of emerald green and gold in the aura. These colors show a
balanced individual combined with inner strength. The gold with the lemon
yellow will also show that this individual is decisive. Communication is an
important part of the job, so there will be silver energies. If this leader is a
more evolved soul, various degrees of pure white light will be seen coming
through this individual. Royal blue will be seen with leaders if they are
loyal to their people. If the individual is clever but conniving, making deals
for his or her personal benefit and not caring what effect those decisions
will have on the people he or she represents, that would generate dark light,
such as cocoa brown and avocado green.
A doctor will have a lot of blue, related to healing, and purple and
orange, for motivation, if he or she is dedicated. A good surgeon will be
bringing in some artistic energies as well as gold energy for inner strength.
On the other hand, a doctor who does not fit the profession will have
energies that are less pronounced in their degree and hues. There may be
gray in such an aura, showing depression. Such a person doesn’t really want
to be doctoring but may have chosen it because of the money.
A thief is going to have very mixed colors and darker hues. Stealing
obviously diminishes the aura. Because this person plans and plots, he or
she will have some silver and lemon yellow, but these colors will be mixed
with the lower shades. This person will also have some gold in order to
have the strength to carry out his or her ideas. As time goes by, if this
person continues to steal, the aura gets darker. With brutal criminals, you
see a lot of inky black and cocoa brown energies. The situation is different
with someone who has a good soul but, due to negative circumstances and
influences, enters into the world of crime. His aura will not be nearly as
dark as that of a hard-core criminal who has been doing it for a good
portion of his life.
Auras of Animals
Although this book is focused on the human aura, everything in nature has
an aura. To help put the human aura in perspective, let’s look at some of the
other types of auras.

Animals, most definitely, have auras. They’re not going to have as large
an aura as humans, but they have strong auras just the same. Also, their
auras are nowhere near the complexity of the human’s. They have no auric
shell, no divisions as the human does. Their aura has two basic components:
there is the aura around the entire body and there is a point of white light in
their forehead that also radiates energy.
The aura around the body of the animal radiates evenly in three to five
colors depending on the development of the animal. A cat will have an aura
that reaches out about a foot in all directions. The colors will often be pink,
red, and yellow. A dog will have a slightly larger aura, extending maybe a
foot and a half. Blue, red, and pink are often seen in a dog’s aura especially
if it’s a loyal dog. The aura around a horse will be even larger, extending
maybe three feet in all directions. Horses are usually spiritually well-
developed animals, often with green, yellow, red, pink, blue, and violet
spiritual colors. All animals have a white point of light at the forehead. This
is the seat of their intelligence and spiritual life. The energy almost always
seen here is silver, showing they are expressing that intelligence. The
interesting thing about animals is they often live life closer to their potential
and nature than humans do. Perhaps they can do this because life is simpler
for them. The other fascinating thing about animals is they are natural
clairvoyants. They can often see auras around each other and people!
Like a human, soul qualities apply to animals as well. Animals are very
definitely on an evolutionary path. An animal’s aura can change depending
on its feelings and mood. They can express anger, fear, sadness, and joy in
their auras like humans do. To see a dog with a very bright pink shows that
it’s a loving dog. If it’s angry, little firecracker energies of red light will
shoot out in all directions. A very dull gray in the aura of a dog would show
that this animal is sick.
Dolphins have very beautiful auras. They have a lot of intelligence and
are very loving and compassionate. Light pinks and yellows can be seen in
these animals. A snake is on the lower order. A monkey’s aura is a very
energetic aura, a lot of reds and oranges. An aggressive animal such as a
tiger or lion has a lot of dynamic power. On the other hand, an elephant has
a lot of compassion so it, too, has pink. The lovable cocker spaniel will
have a lot of pink, too. Animals, by the way, respond very strongly to love.
If you want to lift an animal up, give it love. They also respond very well to
the spiritual light.

Auras of Plants and Minerals
Plants move on a whole different spectrum from the animal and the human.
There is consciousness with plants, but it’s obviously on a much more basic
level. A plant’s growth process is focused strongly around adapting to its
environment. And we have seen countless examples of how ingenious
nature is in its adaptability.
The aura of the plant has usually two or three colors in it. Naturally
enough, green is very predominant in most plants’ auras. However, a variety
of energies exist here, too. The aura of an oak tree is red and pink and
radiates about two feet around the contours of the tree. The pine tree has
pink and green radiations. Pink around a tree or plant indicates the plant is
content and likes where it is. Fruit trees are interesting because they have
two different auras—the aura of the fruit itself and the aura of the tree. An
orange tree has red and pink coming from the fruit and green and pink
emanating from the tree itself. If a tree is very healthy, you might even see a
little gold. If the tree is not so healthy, there will again be gray.
Ferns have a lively aura also, with pink and green shoots of energy. The
aura of a carrot is pretty small with orange emanations. Vegetables and fruit
when they are cut don’t have as much of an aura as when they’re still on the
tree or vine. Many times, when I am in a market, I will buy fruits or
vegetables by the vibrancy of their aura.
Flowering plants usually have more of an aura. The rose, a very spiritual
flower, has pink hues around it, especially when it’s healthy. It doesn’t
matter what the color of the flower itself is. Plants, too, respond to love. A
loved and nurtured plant will grow better than a neglected one. Directing
energy to a plant or tree helps it to grow better.
From the plant kingdom we now enter the mineral kingdom. This is a
fascinating area because objects considered inanimate are actually quite
alive. Everything is alive and teeming with energy. The difference is that
minerals have an even slower vibration than the plants. Their aura will
extend just a little and appear in one or two colors. If we were observing a
horseshoe, for instance, its aura would be emanating a bluish white energy
out about a half inch. It would not have as large an aura as a piece of wood
because it is not as alive as the wood is. Gems and crystals are very
interesting minerals. People feel good wearing gems, but there is a reason

behind that. Their auras follow true to their color. An amethyst crystal will
have a purple hue; an emerald, a green hue; and so on. Of all the gems, the
diamond has the greatest radiations. It usually radiates a silver energy and
sometimes a variety of colors three times the distance of the other gems.
These crystals and gems have healing properties of various kinds that can
be beneficial when working with the aura. We are rekindling the esoteric
meaning and healing power of stones and gems.


CHAPTER 3
THE COLORS YOU ARE
WHEN I STARTED SEEING auras, one of my first reactions was to wonder what
a particular color meant. Bright, beautifully colored auras attracted me and
dark, disturbing auras repelled me. Beyond that, I couldn’t understand why
one person would have certain colors around him, while someone else
would have very different colors. I tried early on to find some information
or material about what I was seeing, but there were no teachers I could turn
to for help. And since no one else was seeing these spiritual colors, I had no
way of putting my experiences into perspective. All that changed when I
was eleven years old and enrolled in a private drama school run by a
woman named Dorothy LaMoss.
Dorothy headed one of the best theater stock companies in the Midwest.
She had also gained a reputation on Broadway and in Hollywood. She was
an eccentric woman. On the outside, she had an appearance of austerity, but
once you got to know her, she had a good sense of humor and could be
quite charming. We got along well together. She knew her craft and was a
demanding teacher who produced results.
One day after I had been with her for about six months, she asked me to
come on a Saturday to see her. I arrived that Saturday, wondering what she
wanted from me. At the time, we were rehearsing a play, and I thought she
was going to drop me. When I got there, she started asking me questions
that had nothing to do with the play. She asked how I perceived things. I
told her I saw things just like anyone else. Then she asked if I could see
colors around people. That got my attention.
“Why do you ask me that?” I asked.
“Because you can see the aura,” she said. When she said the word
“aura,” I jumped.

“Is that what it’s called?!” It was the first time I had heard the term.
“Yes,” she said. “And I would like to pass on to you what my grandmother
and mother have taught me. I am a Hermetic scientist. I would like to teach
you what I know and give you a better understanding of your gifts.”
Thus began my first encounter with real knowledge of the aura. Every
Saturday, I would study with Dorothy in private. She had several ancient
books on Hermetic science, covering many aspects of metaphysical work.
The books were hundreds of years old and were based on writings that were
much older. I spent many hours at her home, copying reams of information
from the Hermetic teachings. Dorothy had diagrams and drawings that
showed the various types of auras. Charts included auric colors in all their
shades and hues. These were broken down very clearly, and the meanings of
those colors were given in detail. It was an illuminating time I shall always
remember. Even today, with interest in the aura and metaphysics
blossoming, I have yet to see the same depth of information I was given by
Dorothy and those sacred texts. It became the basis of my spiritual teaching
years later and is one of the reasons I am writing this book.
Spiritual energies in the aura range from the beautiful, high, pearl luster
colors of the advanced soul to the inky blacks, dull metal grays, and dirty
maroons of the undeveloped individual. Most people fall into the middle
range, with both higher and lower energies moving in their aura. When the
soul is ready to progress to the next level of development, the shade
becomes lighter and is frequently mistaken for white.
The auric emanations seen around a highly developed person are more
real and vivid than colors perceived in the physical world. Blues and
greens, as beautiful as they are in the colors of sky or leaves, are even more
vivid and powerful in the spiritual dimension. The opposite is also true. The
energies seen around a devolved aura can be grotesque and hideous. In
addition to the unappealing colors, there’s a feeling and vibration
accompanying the colors that does not exist in the physical realm.
Luminous colors are uplifting and scintillating, while colors of the lower
vibrations actually exhibit depressing and often chilling qualities.
Spiritual colors fall into two categories: enlightened and unenlightened.
Enlightened colors are spiritual energies imbued with their divine essence
and being expressed in the aura as they were intended to be. Unenlightened
colors are spiritual energies that have been corrupted. They started as divine

energy but through misuse lost their spiritual vitality and degraded to the
unenlightened status.
As you review these energy color definitions, reflect on how they
pertain to you. Again, you don’t need to see Divine Light to recognize its
operation in you. By knowing the meaning of the various energy colors, you
can determine what energy you have in your aura. For example, if you’re a
loving person, you can bet there’s deep rose pink light of spiritual love in
your aura. If you find you’re getting angry a great deal, chances are you’re
expressing vitiated red in your aura that you’ll need to work out of.
Enlightened Colors

Auric Color Chart: Illustration 3.1 (Enlightened colors)
Enlightened colors are spiritual energies that we have attracted and earned
as a result of our positive thoughts, actions, and deeds. They express the
spiritually attuned part of our nature. These energies have retained their
divine essence and purpose and are actively working to realize our spiritual
potential. It’s also with these positive energies that we are helped to
transmute the darker parts of our aura. (See color Illustration 3.1.)
White

Along with gold, white in an aura is considered one of the highest colors. It
means purity. It symbolizes the light of God bringing illumination to
humanity. Many spiritual attributes are connected with the white light. This
energy in the aura indicates a spiritual, often visionary, soul. Revelation is
connected with white light. A great deal of gentleness comes with this color
as well. Pearl white represents kindness and a forgiving quality. Oyster
white, which has almost a very light yellow in it, means the soul is steadfast
and trying hard to learn lessons. Crystal white, the purest form of white,
shows that the soul has acquired complete mastery; it represents the
blending of strength, courage, vitality, determination, and perseverance.
Gold
Gold is the energy of wisdom, illumination, self-confidence, faith, inner
strength, and courage. It is a very strong protective energy. If you have gold
in your aura, you have the power, the will, to master the lower self. You
have the confidence of knowing who and what you are. You know what you
can accomplish and do. You move and act decisively. Gold brings in strong
dynamic powers that can cut you loose from feeling futile, frustrated, and
inadequate.
Pink
Pink is the color of love, especially the deep rose pink. Pink is a universal
color expressing joy, comfort, compassion, human and divine love, and
beauty. It comes through in many shades from the high pearl luster to the
fuchsia and rose red pinks. Crimson shows a natural, unpretentious, loving
nature. A pearl luster pink, which is a lighter shade than the deep rose pink,
shows a soul’s pure, selfless love for God. This pink is absolutely devoid of
jealousy and selfishness.
Silver
Silver is the energy of spiritual intelligence. Silver in the aura shows a
person with keen powers of perception and a quick, alert mind. This person

will not let others do the thinking for him or her. I often see silver sparkles
or diamond points of light moving around a person’s head when he or she is
in tune with this power. The brain and cells of the body have silver radiating
from them, as well as from the health lines, characterizing a healthy, active
individual.
Blue
This color is often seen around a person who is in pursuit of spiritual truth,
and this is more or less a royal blue. This individual, as a rule, will
overcome all obstacles in the search for truth. Bright blue in the aura shows
integrity, sincerity, and natural wisdom. Often, someone with predominant
blue is involved in science or the arts. Royal blue also means a very loyal,
devoted person. Consider the expression “true blue.” It shows honesty, as
well as good judgment in material affairs, and it can signal a very religious
soul. Madonna blue, a light but not quite powder blue, shows obedience and
fulfillment of duties. This person obeys God’s will. Sapphire blue is one of
the strongest healing colors and is seen around doctors and healers. Aqua is
also a very healing color, high in vibration, and can indicate prosperity.
Along with violet, it can bring in peace and help quiet the nervous system.
Peacock blue shows talents and abilities. Blue-purple indicates
accomplishment with God’s power, as well as a person who is making an
effective connection with his or her divine self.
Powder Blue
This is a light blue energy that brings in high, creative inspiration. It is one
of the pearl luster colors, which means this is a very ethereal power. In the
aura, it shows an artistic person who loves beauty. Light blue shows
devotion to noble ideals. Great artists in the throes of inspiration will have
powder blue strongly marked in their auras.
Turquoise

Turquoise is the energy of prosperity, and this is in all departments of your
life—an abundance of ideas, friends, and material goods. It’s a “good luck”
energy. Turquoise holds you in the consciousness of wealth and freedom
from limitation and restriction. A person with this energy in his or her aura
thinks in unlimited terms and knows that the money or the resources will be
there for them when they need it, even when the outside world appears to
show the opposite.
Green
Green is the color of growth and renewal. Emerald green expresses
balance in an individual and is a very important color to have. This
individual has his or her life in order. Emerald green is also the color of
harmony of mind, body, and soul. It’s seen in a person who, growing in
knowledge, experiences harmony in many facets of life. It reveals one’s
love of nature and the outdoors. Pale, delicate green is sympathy. Apple
green shows new spiritual growth and hope, loving service, and
cooperation. Green is restful to nerves and good for overcoming fear.
Green-blue indicates a trustworthy, helpful nature.
Lemon Yellow
This energy brings in powers of concentration. It deals with the intellect.
People who have this color strongly in their auras may devote their entire
life to the study of higher truths. They will be able to embrace a subject and
stick with it until it is learned and mastered. Lemon yellow in the aura
shows mental vigor in artistic, creative, and scientific endeavors. Yellow,
for example, will be seen in a schoolroom around children who are
learning. Teachers, of course, have a great deal of yellow. Yellow represents
a healthy body, mind, and intellect. It is beneficial in dispelling fear, worry,
and nervousness. Bright, optimistic people have this lemon yellow in their
auras. Yellow and orange together can be very inspiring.
Orange

This is a bright orange, like the fruit. The color orange means that the
person has strong motivation, enthusiasm, and good organizational abilities.
This energy can also show a burning desire or ambition. A very determined
individual, one who almost always overcomes obstacles and meets his or
her goals, will earn this color energy. Straight orange expresses
thoughtfulness, consideration, and soul energy. The person is a dynamic
leader, a live wire. Golden orange is wisdom and energy, heightened mental
and spiritual abilities, and self-control—a high spiritual vibration not often
seen.
Red
This is life energy, especially ruby red. It radiates a lot of vitality. Red is a
color that can also mean righteousness. It indicates an enthusiastic
individual with high aspirations. It’s the passion part of us. People with red
in their auras have insights into other people, and they work well with
others. They are not defeated easily. Ruby red is usually physical vitality
and endurance. Red invigorates the body. Rose red represents an active
love; rose red and orange together help to create a glow of well-being,
promoting a healthy outlook. These are predominantly strong and uplifting
colors, bringing brightness and a feeling of warmth, a desire for living.
Clear red is faithful; orange-red is a healing and cleansing color. Coral
represents authority. Scarlet red can indicate a soul with spiritual power. If
the scarlet red is tinged with vitiated red, that can indicate egotism. Red-
purple represents power over the body.
Violet
The person who has violet possesses an aura that is serene and calm. He or
she expresses an inner and outer poise. This person is always willing to be
of service to humanity. Violet brings in high spiritual power, true greatness,
and unselfish efforts. Violet offers mental protection. If the violet moves
into lavender, a worshipful character is revealed. Orchid, which is the
slightly deeper shade, denotes humility and, as the first cousin to lavender,
is holy and spiritual.

Purple
This color in a person’s aura means deep peace. Also, a person with purple
in his or her aura is deeply religious in a mystical way. Yet, purple also
expresses an ability to deal with practical and worldly matters. Purple-
indigo indicates that one is seeking spiritual power. Waves of purple bands
under the feet show a person who has overcome adversity.
Indigo
This color gives inspiration and deep inner strength of a purely spiritual
nature. It is an extremely high color and seldom seen to any marked degree.
One who has this color has come a long way, as it means that he or she has
awakened in the spirit self. It doesn’t take much of this energy to have a
powerful effect on the aura. Indigo-violet shows someone who is searching
for a spiritual experience.
Unenlightened Colors

Auric Color Chart: Illustration 3.1 (Unenlightened colors)
Unenlightened energies show some type of defilement or corruption of the
Divine Light. They are divine energies that have somehow been misused
and are now void of the divine essence they were originally imbued with.
For instance, a bright, clear mind would have the lemon yellow energy in it,
but if the person became lethargic and lazy, then the bright yellow would
degrade to a dirty, creamy, mustard energy. The brightness would vanish
because the person was not utilizing spiritual energy as it was intended to
be used and there is no longer the divine essence in that light as there was
before. This person would now have a difficult time making decisions.

Mustard yellow could also signal sickness. If it gets very dull, it can even
show a savage person. Bright orange is the color of drive, enthusiasm, and
ambition, but if it turns into a burnt orange, the person has become filled
with self-pride. Dark brownish orange shows a lack of ambition stemming
from repression. In addition to the dark color, these energies have a
repulsive, cold vibration. In other words, they’re no fun!
If you recognize some of these energies operating in you, it’s simply a
sign of where you need to work to improve: you needn’t worry or hit
yourself over the head about it. Remember that your aura is constantly
changing, and there’s not one aspect you can’t elevate and transmute. If
your thinking is lethargic, it can become astute. If you’re mean, you can
become kind, and so on.
Every one of us, at one point or another, has created dark light. It’s part
of the human experience to then rise above these conditions. The thing to
remember about unenlightened energies is that they are not part of God’s
divine emanations. They’re artificial and not part of your true, divine
nature. You do not need to claim these negative energies as your own. You
just need to clear them out of your aura and avoid creating any new
destructive vibrations. The best part of all is that these negative energies are
powerless before the Divine Light. They have no real influence unless you
invite them to operate in you. The more good you do, the more of the high
colors you attract and accumulate, and the more you displace these lower
vibrations.
Gray
Gray energy is connected with fear, gloom, and depression. Gray is the
color of illness. When someone expresses gray energy, that person can be a
worrier. Gray appears in the auras of people who can’t see their way out of
whatever dark cloud they’ve fallen into. However, if there is silver moving
in with the gray, it shows someone who has known despair and suffering
but is fighting his or her way out. Charcoal gray indicates despair, and gray-
black is heaviness, dullness, grief, and loss.
Vitiated Red

This energy comes through in a dark, dirty, maroon red. It shows
lustfulness. This person is mainly operating from the lower animal, with
instinctual levels of consciousness. The person may be intoxicated by sex
and have an insatiable appetite for more. It can suggest perversion and a
definite misuse of the sexual energy. Vitiated red also shows deterioration
of the person. Deep, muddy red shows strong anger, nervousness, a
domineering temperament, and strife.
Avocado Green
This is a very dark green, like the outside of an avocado. It reveals deceit in
an individual. This is someone who is out to cheat and take advantage of
people. A traitor would have avocado green in his or her aura. It can show a
person who is greedy. Avocado green is also present in the aura of a person
with a consuming jealousy. It is a very insidious energy I have seen too
often in people. Olive green, which is lighter in shading, shows envy.
Dark Brown
Brown, especially cocoa brown, shows someone who is cruel and petty.
This energy stimulates selfishness and selfish desires for power. It can show
someone who wishes to achieve and grow with intense feelings, but in the
wrong directions. Dull brown denotes avarice. Greenish brown shows petty
jealousy. A brownish mass of color can mean miserliness. Brown can also
express guilt and repression. The lighter clear brown, however, is not an
unenlightened energy like the others; it indicates an earthly, sometimes
material-minded person.
Black
Black is the lowest vibration of all the colors. It is totally absent from the
higher vibrations. It indicates someone who is open to dark influences, even
vicious evil. Inky black clouds around a person are indicative of malice and
hatred. A soul with this energy may be prone to murder or may have already
committed a heinous crime. This person is capable of committing even

more terrible crimes without hesitation or conscience. Lighter, smoky black
indicates a “dark night of the soul,” someone in the depths of despair. It can
mean sorrow and suicidal impulses.
A Gallery of Auric Portraits
Let’s apply our knowledge of spiritual colors and the aura as we look at
some illustrations of what the aura is like in activity. Some people have the
mistaken impression that their aura is something impersonal or removed
from everyday life. Nothing could be further from the truth. The aura is an
intimate, dynamic, and active part of everyone’s life.
Like snowflakes, no two auras are exactly alike because no two people
are going to use the life force of God in exactly the same way. If you spend
your life planting seeds of hate, you will not display the auric splendor of
those who plant seeds of love. If you are a violinist and I am a stockbroker,
our auras will not be alike because our jobs require different focuses and
skills. Whether filled with strife or filled with love, our lives are entirely
dependent on the kind of energy we have created for ourselves. This gallery
of auric portraits depicts auras of actual people I have known. I have chosen
auras that show a dramatic use of spiritual energy, either for positive or for
negative purposes. Again, these auric conditions are not static or permanent.
The aura is active and changing constantly, its shades of expression as
varied as the people who express them.
Romantic Love
Here we see the aura of a twenty-year-old college student who fell in love
with a young musician. (See color Illustration 3.2.) The musician returned
her affections and an intense romance began. In this aura, a cloud of pink
above the girl’s head shows that she is strongly thinking of love, and of her
beloved in particular. Around the whole aura is a bubbly pink champagne
energy moving in a circular motion, joyously expressing the perpetual state
of euphoria her love creates. It also reveals that the love is being
reciprocated and that she is experiencing a vibrantly loving relationship. For
the energy to be as intense as this, love has to be reciprocated.

Romantic Love: Illustration 3.2
Notice the active emanations of emerald green, royal blue, and gold
radiating from her Hermetic center, showing steadfastness, determination,
and strength of soul. This girl could not be shaken from her feelings. Hers
was an all-consuming love. Active emanations of pink radiating in
starpoints of light from her emotional center show the actual expression, the
feelings of love. The two were constantly expressing their love for each
other. Energy such as this will stay in the aura for as long as the bond of
love is sustained.

In such a relationship, the lovers will do anything for each other.
Feelings go beyond sexual attraction. They’re best friends, and neither
would dream of hurting the other in any way. They’re always looking to
please one another and enjoy what the other does for them. This aura is
funloving, optimistic, and supportive. Sometimes there will be
possessiveness, which can bring in some lower energies, but in this case, it
wasn’t there. Her feelings revolved around an intense desire to be with her
love. This soul is monogamous and immune to outside temptation. I know
this sounds like a fairy-tale romance, but it does happen. I have seen many
auras expressing love, although I’ve seen it to this degree less often.
Intelligence

Intelligence: Illustration 3.3
This is the aura of an atomic scientist I observed in one of my lectures. (See
color Illustration 3.3.) Naturally, the energies in his mental division were
particularly strong. He had a band of yellow light just below the gold band
connected with his mental division. This band had been built up through
constant use of his powers of concentration. Another salient feature often
accompanying such a brilliant mind is the solid silver triangle within the
mental center—a mark of exceptional intelligence, even genius. That he
was in the midst of intense mental work is evident in the upper part of his
aura, where equation-like thought forms, some of which were quite long

and complicated, were being projected from his subconscious, because he
was so focused on his work. Brilliant souls such as this also have a highly
developed magnetic division.
The weak links I have found in studying the auras of scientists and
intellectuals are in the emotions. One would think that highly intelligent
people would also possess well-balanced emotions, but this is often not the
case. Emotionally, this man still had things to clear. The imbalance in this
case showed up as avocado green rays shooting out from his emotional
center. Strong irritability, manifesting in jagged dark red lines, also
projected from his emotional center. An absence of pink in his aura
suggested that he probably was a little cold in his relations with people.
Hatred

Hatred: Illustrations 3.4
This is the aura of a woman who’d been molested as a girl by her father.
(See color Illustration 3.4.) Although many years had passed, the result was
a basic distrust and hatred of men—not pleasant for the men in her life. This
aura shows the misplaced hatred she was directing toward her boyfriend at
the time.
When I first met this woman, her aura wasn’t so bad. She was actually
very artistic—shown here by the active magnetic division—but as problems
in her relationship developed, they triggered this kind of auric reaction. It
took several months for the energy to build to this degree. A black cloud

began to form above her head, showing persistent thoughts of long-
standing, festering hatred. The fact that it was above her head means that
although the thoughts were focused in hate, her mind could nevertheless be
clear in its dark thoughts. Occasionally, I will see a cloud of hatred in and
around the head area, which is indicative of confusion and poor functioning,
but this was not the case here. The woman owned her own business and was
doing quite well. Lightning bolts of maroon and black were also in her aura,
showing rage born of hatred. Black radiations from the Hermetic and
emotional centers testified to the consuming and destructive effects of
hatred: she was making life very difficult for herself and the people around
her. Such an aura must be closely monitored because a person in this
condition is prone to rash acts. This woman talked about how her boyfriend
was no good, and how she thought about killing him.
And yet, this is by no means an evil aura. The woman actually had
spiritual inclinations and, interestingly, clairvoyant abilities as well, but she
was disturbing those energies by creating such dark light.
Anger

Anger: Illustrations 3.5
Anger is perhaps the most dramatic of the negative emotional states seen in
the aura. This illustration represents the energies of a man who constantly
lashed out at his wife. (See color Illustration 3.5.) She didn’t have to give
him much of a reason to launch into one of his tirades. The situation ended
tragically. The wife eventually became ill because of all that happened and
died.
This anger extended beyond the perimeters of the auric shell. Squiggles
and thunderbolts of vitiated red shot through the aura, along with streaks of
red and blotches of olive green—unmistakable signs of extreme

disharmony. The Hermetic center held clouds of dark brown and other
muddled colors, showing the heaviness he was carrying on a constant basis.
Broken lines of brown energy moved from his throat center when he was on
one of his tirades, yelling cruel words at his wife. His emotional center was
one big jumble of jagged vitiated rays of anger and irritation. Black dots
showed the hatred this man felt, even though the wife did nothing to
warrant it. Of course, it wasn’t only his wife he was angry with. He was like
a walking time bomb that was ready to explode at the slightest provocation.
Wealth Consciousness
One of the most prosperous energy fields I’ve ever encountered was that of
a prince of royal German lineage. (See color Illustration 3.6.) He was a man
of immense wealth when he was forced to flee Germany after Hitler came
to power. He managed to take a large chunk of that wealth with him to the
United States. Highly educated and with many skills, he was a diplomat and
geologist, as well as an astute businessman. He owned his own oil
company. Above all, as evinced in his aura, even though he was displaced
from his homeland, he maintained his high level of wealth consciousness.
He was in his seventies by the time I met him but still very alert and active.

Wealth Consciousness: Illustration 3.6
Looking at this illustration, you can see pronounced turquoise energy
moving around him, which means that this prosperity consciousness was
long-standing. There is also a foundation of turquoise at his feet,
establishing it as a steady consciousness that did not waver; he would most
likely carry his prosperity consciousness into every situation. The
preponderance of turquoise in this aura showcases a man who has
continuously attracted and manifested abundance. The turquoise around his
Hermetic center shows the day-to-day activity of the prosperity flow. The
orange active radiations express his enthusiasm and motivations—this man

really enjoyed what he did and was not operating out of greed or pride. As a
rule, this kind of aura is very upbeat and fun to be around.
Poverty Consciousness
This aura represents a negative reaction to a tragic event. (See color
Illustration 3.7.) The illustration is based on a woman who was widowed
and left with three children to care for. She found work as a maid and was
good at it, but it was a rough go with three kids to raise. Fortunately, the
people in the small town she lived in helped as much as they could, but it
was still hard for her. To compound the problem, she developed a
pessimistic, gloom-and-doom attitude. The reason her aura was adversely
affected was not so much her trying situation as it was her negative
handling of that situation. Depending on him totally, she had put all her
trust in her husband, and when he was gone, her world fell apart. Had this
woman been able to put her faith in God, or even in herself, at this
challenging time, she would have fared far better and bounced back more
quickly.

Poverty Consciousness: Illustration 3.7
Notice the dark energy around her head area. She feels sad,
downtrodden, fearful, and without hope. Most of us have experienced this
feeling to some degree. There’s a feeling of failure. One has to work hard to
get out of this consciousness. Most people make the mistake of seeing
financial woes as permanent, and here’s where they make their big mistake:
feeling stuck and with no way out, they marshal little motivation to make
the necessary effort to make changes. Yet if the condition is seen as
temporary, there is much more motivation, faith, and hope that better days
are in the making.

By this woman’s head is a heavy thought-form concentration of
avocado green, gloomy blue, and cocoa brown, reflecting the constant
darkness of her thoughts. I remember seeing it undulate in this darkened
state, giving those unhealthy thoughts a life all their own. The woman was
always sad and often belittled herself. The fact that this thought form
obscured part of her head shows that the condition was definitely clouding
her thinking. Above this blotchy energy, note the gray cloud of fear. When I
knew her, she was constantly fearful of what might happen next.
Around the Hermetic center was a maroon energy that signified
negative conditions in her personal affairs. There were also brighter colors
of royal blue—loyalty to her children, despite a bleak outlook on life.
Emerald green showed an attempt to keep balance in her life. She was not a
bad person by any means, but had succumbed to the hardships that befell
her. In her emotional center, pink radiations of love showed her to be a
warm person who loved her children very much. Mingling with that love
pink were gray radiations, signaling fear of the future.
Fear
This auric illustration is of a man who was afraid of losing his job. (See
color Illustration 3.8.) Fear and worry energies are very similar in the aura.
They can be about a particular thing or situation, a chronic condition, a
phobia, or an anticipated event. The fear may be justified or not, but when
present to this degree, it’s all-consuming. This man’s worries had been
building for months, which was reflected in a charcoal gray cloud above his
head. If his fear were to diminish, then the gray would also lighten.
Drooping gray lines emanating from the emotional center suggest that this
man was withdrawing from the challenge rather than facing up to it. The
fact that the radiations were moving downward means that the experience
itself was pulling him down, creating a devolving situation. Royal blue still
emanated from around the throat, but the energy was broken, showing the
lack of confidence and weak will that accompanied his fear. In this case, the
man’s fears were based on a real threat, but things ended up okay. He kept
his job. Yet the energy he expended in his worry sapped him of valuable
energy, which took time to rebuild.

Fear: Illustration 3.8
The Spiritual Aspirant
The aura of the spiritual aspirant is one of growth, as the soul begins to
develop its spiritual powers and potential. This aura belonged to a minister
at a metaphysical church, an energetic, enthusiastic, and knowledgeable
person. (See color Illustration 3.9.) This soul had begun its conscious
pilgrimage to its Eternal Home and the woman was working on bettering
herself. The aura had beautiful bands of apple green and powder blue

radiations of light above the woman’s head (but below the spiritual
division). They were very bright, clearly showing she was advancing on the
spiritual path and had already been adapting her life to be in alignment with
her spiritual aspirations.
The Spiritual Aspirant: Illustration 3.9
She had pronounced silver sparkles of light just above the head,
showing she was being quickened in divine intelligence to expand her
spiritual awareness and perceive the new ideas and inspirations that were
coming to her. There was a strong lemon yellow energy in the mental

center, showing her developed intellectual powers and the ability to learn
new things and retain that knowledge. The purple light below her feet was
very bright, showing she had overcome many obstacles to get to where she
was; it didn’t come easy to her. There were sacrifices.
The emerald green ray was strong in her Hermetic center, showing that
not only had she worked through many of these challenges but she had
effectively integrated her spiritual aspirations into the rhythm of her life.
There was a brilliant orange ray emanating from the Hermetic center as
well, indicating the excitement she was experiencing with her new spiritual
discoveries. Above her head, her beautiful crown chakra had begun to open
its petals of light. It wasn’t fully open but this meant that she had started the
process of awakening her conscious awareness of the divine. She was
pulling all facets of her aura together, organizing the energy in beautiful
ways through her dedicated efforts. Such an aura as this is heading toward
the great goal of the enlightened aura.
While this minister was on the road to the higher life, there were still
areas she needed to improve. Most notably was her emotional center. While
she was a loving person, there still were areas of gray, denoting fear, and
vitiated red, denoting anger, indicating that she was struggling emotionally
with some personal issues and was trying to come up out of it. There was a
battle going on between her higher nature, urging her upward, and her lower
nature, which was still fighting the transformation. This internal drama is
completely natural and inevitable. It will fight you until you have it under
your control. The good news is that as long as this person stays on the path
she will eventually work through these lower vibrations and resurrect the
higher, divine nature. This type of aura is not uncommon, especially today,
with more and more people waking up to the spiritual realities of life.


PART II
Meditating With Divine Light


CHAPTER 4
THREE KEYS TO WORKING WITH SPIRITU
ALENERGY
A UNIQUE FEATURE ABOUT tapping into your spiritual bank account is that
you’re drawing energy from a spiritual source outside yourself, and from a
greater place and dimension. This is the reason the light can be so effective.
Because the Divine Light comes from such an exalted realm, it has potency
far beyond anything connected with physical life. As you explore the
myriad ways to work with spiritual energy, keep in mind three simple keys.
They represent the process you will use to employ light in any situation.
Key 1—Decide what you want the light to do for you.
Key 2—Draw the light into your aura.
Key 3—Apply the light to effect the change you desire.
Key 1—Decide What You Want the Light to Do
for You
Before meditating, it helps to have a clear idea of how you want the light to
help. When you meditate with light, meditate with a purpose. This is not to
say that you won’t sometimes simply get into the divine oneness and ask
the Divine Light to bless you. Rather, it means that preparing your
meditations ahead of time will help you be more effective in your light
work. The clearer you are about what you want the light to do for you, the
more definite your results will be.
There are countless situations in which you may call on the light for
spiritual assistance, from meeting daily challenges to working out deeply
embedded character flaws and traumas. If you already know where you

want to focus the light, then you are ready to begin the meditation.
However, since you’re taking the time to develop yourself, I recommend
that you first step back and take personal inventory of your strengths and
weaknesses. This way, you can better see where you are in your
consciousness and spiritual progress. As Socrates said, “The unexamined
life is not worth living.” As part of your normal routine, take time out from
life’s pursuits to reflect on what you’re doing in order to gain a fresh
perspective. The list you compile from this self-inquiry can become a
reference point, not only for what you need to work on but also as a
signpost of your progress.
Recognition Is Half the Battle
The first step in any type of self-inquiry is recognition. You have to
recognize that there are parts of you that need improvement. Despite the
desire many of us have to improve our lives, we often encounter resistance
to the whole process. It’s not easy to recognize a fault or weakness. Many
people go through the greater part of their lives unaware that they may be
doing things that are hurting themselves and others. Recognition of a
personal strength or weakness is a giant step in the right direction. There is
tremendous liberation in the simple realization of why things are the way
they are.
In some fortunate instances, recognition alone is enough to break
through whatever blocks you may have. More often, recognition is the
critical first step toward transformation. Recognition doesn’t have to be
limited to faults. It can be the recognition of a virtue or strength that you
want to make stronger.
Take Responsibility
The next step in conducting an effective self-inquiry is to take responsibility
for your actions. You will not get far in your spiritual growth if you
constantly assign blame for your troubles to other people or outside
circumstances. In my counseling work, people come to me with endless
complaints, sometimes accompanied by self-pity. I say to them, “Do you
want to be the master or the victim of your life?” Stop projecting your own

faults onto others and blaming the other guy for what’s going on in your
life. You may not always be able to control conditions around you, but you
are in absolute control of how you handle the situations in your life. Take
charge of your life and watch how things will change.
Listing Strengths and Weaknesses
To begin your self-inquiry, get a notebook and assign space for six
categories. Label them:
Thoughts Emotions
Personal Affairs (situations and conditions in your life)
Relationships
Career Finances
Then list what you feel are your strengths and weaknesses in each
category. After you write down your observations, check to see how honest
you are with yourself. Are you being too easy, too hard, or right on target?
Which trait seems to stand out the most? That’s probably the one you
should focus on first.
To look at yourself objectively, I recommend conducting a weeklong
self-survey. Keep a log of these six qualities in action. Don’t steer your
observations in any particular direction or judge anything. Don’t change
any of your daily habits. Take the week just as it comes: boring, average,
exciting. Any activity is going to bring out qualities in you. Just observe and
keep track in your journal of what you’re doing. At the end of the week
review your survey. The beauty of this kind of survey is that there’s no
arguing with yourself. If you got angry a lot that week, you got angry. If
you were impatient, you were impatient. Things are clearly seen for what
they are. Of course, not everything will come out in these preliminary
exercises, but what you need to know to begin your light work will be
apparent.
Once you recognize an area to work on, you can plan the spiritual
energies to work with. This book offers many examples to point you in the
right direction. For example, say you decide you need to work on
forgiveness. Maybe someone in your life has hurt you and you have a

difficult time letting that go. Anger and resentment live inside you and you
find it challenging even to be in that person’s presence.
Each person’s situation is unique, but a place to start is to work with the
orange-red flame of purification (see Chapter 6) to clear out the anger and
negative energy that has been brewing in your aura. You would then follow
up with the blue-white fire to build up new life force, because the
resentment has depleted precious energy from your aura. Then you may
work with the deep rose pink of spiritual love to build up a more loving
energy in your consciousness and to see this situation from the eyes of
spirit. Working with this energy is essential in any relationship
entanglement. It can help you see things from a different perspective.
Then you would follow up with the forgiveness prayer. There is a very
powerful one offered in this book (see page 260) that I have worked with
for years. So the list of meditative work you would do in this meditation
would look something like this:
Orange-red flame for purification Blue-white fire for new life force
Deep rose pink for love Forgiveness prayer
With this preparation you would be ready for Key 2—bringing the light
into your aura.
Another example might be that perhaps you recognize a lack of self-
confidence. You don’t believe in yourself as you should and you allow other
people to take advantage of you. In this scenario, you will need to work a
great deal with the energy of confidence, the golden ray of wisdom light.
Perhaps something dampened your enthusiasm and you feel discouraged. In
that case, the bright orange of motivation is needed. In addition, you notice
emotional patterns of fear that need cleansing. So your list of meditative
work might look something like this:
Orange-red flame for purification Blue-white fire for new life force
Golden ray of wisdom light for new confidence Bright orange ray
for motivation and enthusiasm
There are countless combinations of energies to work with depending
on the situation you are dealing with. Working with the Divine Light is an
art as well as a spiritual science. Throughout this book are many meditative
prayers to help you get started in your light work.

Key 2—Draw the Light into Your Aura
Once you know where you want to focus the light, you’re ready to meditate.
The beautiful thing about taking inventory is that not only does it give you
direction as to which way to go with the light, it also helps to get you in the
frame of mind to work with spiritual energy to begin with.
You may have several areas that you want to work on. I recommend
focusing on one area at a time until you have made progress in that
direction before beginning another. This way, you’ll see results faster and
build more confidence in the effectiveness of the light.
In drawing in Divine Light to your aura, follow the six-step process
outlined in Chapter 5. People ask me how long to meditate and how many
rays can be brought in during a meditation. In starting out, I recommend
meditating for twenty minutes. You can certainly do more, but the key is
consistency. You want to meditate daily. It needs to be routine, like brushing
your teeth. This way, you are giving time for the light to build momentum
in your aura. It’s far better to meditate even ten minutes every day than, say,
to do one long meditation on the weekend.
The other key is the depth of your meditation. Your meditation is an
experience with the Divine Light. When you finish a meditation, you should
feel different from when you started. As you become good at meditation,
this will become easier to do. The whole idea of working with the Divine
Light is to uplift your consciousness, which will give you a new perspective
on things.
As far as how many rays to work with, the guideline is to work with as
many rays as you feel you can actually implement at any given time. If
you’re working with the love ray in your meditation, then it’s your job to be
loving! If you’ve brought in the emerald green ray for balance, then it’s
your job to express balance in your life, and so on. You want to bring
enough spiritual energy to effect a change but not too many rays that you
are overwhelmed with the process. Your meditation should feel balanced
and in rhythm with the whole of your life.
Key 3—Apply the Light to Effect the Change You
Desire

Once you have completed your meditation, then there is one more key to
complete your light work—apply the light in your life. Occasionally a
meditation alone can make the change you desire, but for the most part,
you’re going to have to actively apply the light after receiving it. You can’t
expect the change to come just by doing the light work alone and not
applying the spiritual energy where it’s needed. You must become the
example of what you want. The whole key with light meditation is to
integrate the light received into your active life.
You will be spending the most amount of time applying spiritual energy
in your life, so this is a skill you want to get very good at. Some people love
to meditate, but too often don’t follow through after the meditation because
they mistakenly think the meditation is enough. Think of your meditation
like you’re a spiritual warrior getting ready for battle. In your meditation,
you are gathering up all the spiritual arsenal you need. Then you are ready
to go into the battlefield of life prepared.
Strive to be the living example of the divine consciousness you are
requesting. If you called on the energy of faith and trust where once there
was worry and doubt, then it becomes your job to express that faith. Maybe
something comes up that would normally get you worried and upset, but
this time with the support of the Divine Light, you catch yourself and refuse
to fall back into that old pattern. You realize you have the power to do this
and the divine powers will become a deeper part of your life and you will
have conquered a part of your personality.
But if you go back into those muddy waters of worry, you will
neutralize the light work you have just done and the light will have little
positive effect. Unfortunately, those worry energies can reignite in the aura.
It’s like taking two steps forward, but then falling two steps back, leaving
you where you started. So this means you need to be steadfast in your light
work. You have to see it all the way through.
In practice, it takes persistent effort to transform and enlighten the
various facets of your aura. This is why you need to make meditation a
daily practice. If a meditation doesn’t bring about the change you desire the
first time, try again. Through repeated meditation, you build the power in
your aura until it becomes a steadfast part of you. There is no place the
Divine Light can’t go and turn things around. Every facet of your
consciousness can be blessed.

Remember, the spiritual path is not an escape from life’s duties, but the
fulfillment of them. It’s an enhancement of all life’s processes. The light
gives you a much-needed spiritual booster shot, but it is not a shortcut to
spiritual unfoldment. Regardless of your knowledge or talent, you still have
to go through all the steps of growth. Tapping into your spiritual bank
account simply helps you get there faster. Be receptive after doing a
meditation. Sometimes the light works for you in ways you’re not
expecting. There is great joy and freedom in the process. Once the light
starts working in your life, you may see that some people you thought were
friends are not really friends at all. You’ll need the courage to forgive and
let them go and to allow new, like-minded friends to come into your life. Or
you may discover that you’re in the wrong job and will need to start looking
for a new and better one. Be adaptable, and trust the light. It will always
steer you in the right direction. New desires may unfold; you may have
revelations about yourself; talents that were latent may start expressing
themselves. You may also start to witness spiritual gifts awakening. That is
not a prerequisite to the light work, but many I have worked with have had
direct experiences with the light. Once the Divine Light builds in your aura,
a new life will gracefully unfold.


CHAPTER 5
SIX STEPS TO CHANGE YOUR AURA
THE SIX-STEP TECHNIQUE PRESENTED in this chapter is a simple yet powerful
meditation to draw the light from your spiritual reservoir into your aura. It’s
a technique that’s been a part of the metaphysical tradition for centuries. I
have been practicing this meditation for most of my life and taught this
technique to thousands of people with astonishing results. It has no formal
name, but I call it the Higher Self meditation.
Understanding the Higher Self
Before beginning the Higher Self meditation, there is one more part of your
spiritual anatomy to look at—a very sacred part. As we have explored, you
can change your aura by first tapping your spiritual bank account. Yet, how
do you actually tap into this creative flow? You have this magnificent
source of power, and you have the expression of this light in your aura, but
what is the mechanism by which this light actually reaches you? There
needs to be a link between you and your spiritual reservoir that can guide
the whole light process. Fortunately, this link is already a part of you. It’s a
magnificent aspect of your spiritual design that already has the divine
intelligence and awareness to relate to the light directly, as well as relate to
the soul part of you. This link—or emissary of light—is your Higher Self.
The Higher Self has been mentioned so many times in spiritual
literature that it has become part of the nomenclature of metaphysical study.
Many teachers recognize it as a guiding force in humanity’s evolution.
Helena Blavatsky, the great metaphysician, cofounder of the Theosophical
Society, and author of masterpieces such as Isis Unveiled and The Secret

Doctrine, called the Higher Self “the divine prototype” and “the reflection
of the universal spirit.” The famous European mystic Rudolf Steiner called
the conscious awakening of the Higher Self a “spiritual rebirth.” Other
teachings call it a “lifeline,” or a beacon by which a ship lost at sea can find
its way home; the awakened soul is answerable to and looks for guidance
from the Higher Self alone.
All the spiritual light you receive from the celestial realms has to first
pass through the Higher Self to reach you. The Higher Self does this
automatically, but when the process is attended to in a conscious and direct
way, it can greatly increase the light your Higher Self can transmit to you. If
it were not for the Higher Self, you would have no direct way of connecting
with the Divine Light.
The beauty of your Higher Self is that it’s already in its divine
awareness and therefore in a state of perfection. It’s a greater part of you
that is completely aware of the spiritual realms above it and yet keenly
aware of what is happening to you, here and now. You can completely rely
on the Higher Self. It has no blemishes, no human traits to disappoint you.
It’s totally reliable and is a guiding force in steering your soul in its
evolution. The Higher Self is always with you and always working for you,
whether you are aware of it or not. As you align yourself with its power, its
effectiveness greatly multiplies.
The Higher Self is often contrasted with what is commonly termed the
“lower self.” The lower self refers to the unenlightened human parts of your
consciousness. These are the parts of you that have not yet spiritually
developed. For many people, the lower self is all they’re aware of at this
point in their spiritual evolution.
In addition to channeling light, the Higher Self is one of the tools you
will use to help transcend your human awareness and reach into your
spiritual knowing. This consciousness will help you awaken to the spiritual
path and your divine potential. It also helps you to consciously become
aware of the light process.
Fortunately, the Higher Self is not simply a metaphysical concept. It is
an intimate and sacred part of you. In the aura, the Higher Self appears as a
point of light twenty-four inches above the physical head. If you wish, you
may call this the eighth spiritual center or chakra. Its full name is the Higher
Self Point of Spiritual Knowing. (See color Illustration 5.1.) It’s about three
inches in diameter (similar to the other centers) but it does not rotate. It’s

gold, with a point of lighter gold in the center. From this center, thousands
of gold and white threadlike rays shoot out about fourteen inches in all
directions. Many depictions of spiritual blessings, such as the Coronation of
the Virgin by Diego Velázquez, interestingly place the source of the blessing
at the Higher Self Point. The more developed and connected to the Higher
Self the individual is, the more radiant and extended these rays will be. As a
particular energy is drawn into it, many of the rays will take on the color
and quality of the light being called upon.
Since it is above your head and above the mixed elements of your
human aura, the Higher Self Point can receive the light clearly and directly.
Think of the Higher Self Point as like a satellite in space. An orbiting
satellite can receive a signal from deep space much more clearly than a
receiving station on Earth can because the satellite has no interference from
the atmosphere. In the same way, without the atmosphere of human
interference, the Higher Self Point becomes a gateway to the greater realms
of light and life. It’s an indescribable sight.

The Higher Self Point of Spiritual Knowing: Illustration 5.1
The Higher Self Meditation
To begin the Higher Self meditation, first find a quiet, relaxing place. It
should be a place where you feel good and can concentrate without
interruption. You don’t want to be around a lot of people when you are
doing this meditation. If you don’t already have one, find a spot in your
home that is conducive to meditation. Ideally, it should be an area that

others don’t spend much time in. It may be a corner of your bedroom where
you have your own special chair—anyplace where you can work
consistently. This way, the energy will have a chance to build, which will
make your light work all the more effective. If you live with other people,
let them know what you are doing and that your meditation time is to be
uninterrupted time. You may also work outdoors, which is excellent. Being
in nature is certainly an effective way to work with the light. Again, find a
place where there aren’t many people nearby, such as your backyard or a
park. I’ve even pulled my car off a main road, found a quiet neighborhood,
and done a meditation right in the car.
The point of meditation is to become still and shut the world out, so you
can tune into your own divine nature. Meditation is a way to get closer to
God. In the activities of daily life, it’s hard to feel your divine oneness
unless you’re able to tune out that activity periodically. I had a student once
who said she was meditating every day, but that things weren’t happening
fast enough for her. So I went to her house, and she showed me how she
meditates. To begin with, she had the radio blasting. She also had the phone
right next to her and picked it up twice during her “meditation.” She had
food on the stove and would get up periodically to check it. In other words,
she was doing everything but getting into her divine oneness. How could
the light work be effective this way?
I’ve had people ask if they can meditate while they drive or exercise.
Certainly you can ask that the light bless you during these activities, but this
is not meditation. In meditation, you are physically still. The whole idea is
to step outside the activity of the world to be in the God presence.
Remember why you are meditating. This is your one-on-one time with God.
If you find yourself saying you are too busy to meditate, that’s like saying
you are too busy to spend time in the God presence. Put your meditation
time at the center of your life and watch how everything else falls into
place.
The Higher Self meditation is actually a form of meditation and prayer.
Prayer is a sending out, a petition to God. The goal of prayer is to
connect with your divine source. Through the act of prayer you are reaching
out to the divine. Then, in this divine oneness, you will be requesting the
Divine Light and inspiration to flow to you through what are called
meditative prayers. Meditation is getting into the stillness to receive. In
your light work, you will be getting into the stillness to receive the light that

you have petitioned to the divine for. So meditation and prayer work hand
in hand.
In first working with the light, twenty minutes is ideal. Light a white
candle and place a bowl of water next to the candle. This will help to set the
right vibration in the room for your work. You can place flowers near you if
you like. It doesn’t matter what time of day you meditate. I like to meditate
in the morning because it helps to start my day. I suggest selecting some
clothes that you will wear for your meditation time, such as a robe, because
with each meditation you’re putting light into those clothes. Over time, so
much light will be held in your meditation clothes that you’ll find yourself
in the mood to meditate just by putting them on.
The Six Steps to the Higher Self Meditation
1. Relax.
2. Establish protection.
3. Check your spiritual centers.
4. Connect with your higher self.
5. Down-ray the light.
6. Ground yourself.
Step 1—Relax
Take a few moments to simply relax. Let go of the world’s clamor and your
own preoccupations. It doesn’t matter what’s going on around you. You’re
in a sacred place now, where you’re making your connection with the
divine, and you want to be as clear and lucid as possible. This relaxed state
is not a sleepy state, but an awakened calm.
If you’re upset or disturbed by something, be sure to calm down first
before starting the light work. You don’t want to start angry or disturbed.
Take a break and go for a walk or a drive, and don’t think at all about what
is bothering you. If you’re having trouble relaxing, begin by playing some
music to calm you. You can also start with some slow, deep breathing.

Step 2—Establish Protection
When you do any type of meditation, you’re putting yourself in an open,
receptive state of consciousness. Spiritual protection is important at every
level of life and doubly important while in the meditative state. There’s a lot
of activity in the world, a lot of negative energies coming at you from
people and places that can affect you if you permit them to. So, before you
start your meditation, make sure to call for protective light around you.
To establish your protection, once you have found your place to
meditate and are relaxed, place yourself in a bubble of golden light. To do
this, stand up, hold your arms out, and envision yourself surrounded by a
golden bubble of light just beyond arm’s length from your body. This
bubble of light is all around you—in front of you, behind you, above you,
below you, and on either side of you. Envision seven flows of living light
surrounding you and keeping you in perfect safety while you say the
following prayer.
Golden Bubble of Protection
“Encircle me now in a golden bubble of protective light. I ask for seven
flows of this light to surround me, keeping me in Thy perfect protection.”
Once you feel you have established your protection, you can start. Over
time, if you are consistent with your meditations, you will build your
protection very strongly, and you won’t need to stand. You will be able to
reinforce your protection sitting down. In addition to the golden bubble, it is
recommended to add to your protection by closing what is called the
psychic door (see page 324).
Step 3—Check Your Spiritual Centers

In working with the Divine Light, you’re most frequently going to be
sending the light from your Higher Self Point to four spiritual centers.
These are:
The mental center The throat center
The Hermetic center (heart center) The emotional center
These four centers are going to be focal points for receiving and
distributing the light throughout your consciousness. It’s not that the other
centers don’t come into play; they’re just not designed to be the kind of
receiving and transmitting stations that these centers are.
When the centers are moving in their proper flow and rhythm, they
should be spinning in a clockwise direction. (See Illustration 5.2.) Imagine
a clock, attached to your chest with its face out, its hands rotating in their
normal direction. Twelve o’clock would be straight up, three o’clock to
your left, six o’clock below you, and nine o’clock to your right. This is
clockwise. If your centers are moving counterclockwise, you are opened up
to all sorts of disharmony and the centers make poor points of contact for
the Divine Light. Even if only one center is moving counterclockwise, it
can throw the others off.
To check your centers, begin by placing your hands, right hand over
left, over the center you want to check. Start with the emotional center and
work your way up. Become very still and try to get a feeling of how your
center is moving. If you feel fine or sense that the center is moving
clockwise, everything is good and you can move on to the next center. If
you feel uneasy or sense that the center is off, envision the pure white light
going into that center and changing its spin, moving it clockwise. Continue
in the same way until you have checked all four centers.
If you do sense a center is off, by doing this you will know even better
where to ask this light to go. In addition, checking the spiritual centers
beautifully prepares the consciousness for the Divine Light you are about to
call on.
Step 4—Connect with Your Higher Self

Now you’re ready to make your connection with the light. To begin the
Higher Self meditation, sit upright in a chair, with your legs uncrossed and
feet flat on the floor. (See Illustration 5.3.) Take your shoes off so the
energy can flow freely. In this type of meditation, it’s important that your
feet are flat on the floor. This will act as a strong grounding for the powers
that will be flowing down from above you. During the meditation, keep
your hands on your emotional center, right hand over left, to help polarize
the energy as it flows through you. Begin your meditation by placing your
attention at your Higher Self Point, twenty-four inches above your head. By
effectively placing your conscious attention at this point, you are making a
strong connection with your Higher Self. It’s very possible you will feel
elation, or a heightened awareness of the Higher Self, but such an
experience is not a prerequisite to conducting an effective meditation.

Moving the Centers Clockwise : ILLUSTRATION 5.2
When you’re ready, start by saying the following invocation out loud.
This invocation is a signal that you are calling for help. It affirms your
connection with your Higher Self Point and helps you to get in the divine
state you need to work with the light.

The Meditative Pose : ILLUSTRATION 5.3
Invocation
“Heavenly Father, Holy Mother God, I raise my consciousness into Thy
consciousness where I become One with Thee. I ask to receive that which I
need and that which I need to know now.”

As you say these words, place your attention into your Higher Self
Point, becoming one with its divine essence. Let go the world and any
worries or concerns. You are on holy ground now. Feel and sense that you
are in the clarity of spiritual knowing, a place of peace, serenity, and
harmony. The centers within your body can be tainted and corrupted, but
not this Higher Self. You have placed your consciousness above the human
levels of your being and moved into a pure divine part of you.
Step 5—Down-Ray the Light
Once you have established a connection with your Higher Self, you can
petition the light verbally. Verbalization is important because it helps you to
focus, while also making you a much more active participant in the light
work. You’re going to be calling on a particular light ray to do a specific
task. If you say it silently, there’s a tendency to let your mind wander a
little. Verbalizing your prayers is a strong affirmation of the light, and it
also brings into play spiritual tone through your throat center.
In calling on the light, the key verb you will use is “down-ray.” The
Divine Light is going to be down-rayed from the higher realms to your
aura. Remember, this is not a spiritual supply that comes from within you.
Rather, it is energy that you are drawing from a source that is above and
beyond you. As you ask for the energy you need, first see that energy
downrayed to the Higher Self Point. See the color of the energy you are
working with touching into and activating this point. From the Higher Self
Point, envision a beam of light moving down into the four spiritual centers
you are working with (see Illustration 5.2), or wherever you’re asking the
light to go. As the light touches into each center, hold it there for a moment
to feel the connection being made, knowing that these centers are being
ignited with spiritual power. See the center completely filling with the
colored light you’re asking for, and out-raying about a foot in all directions.
Then ask for the particular divine quality you want the light to bring you.
As mentioned, you will be calling on the light by saying a meditative
prayer. These prayers give the directions you want the light to take. This
book contains many examples of meditative prayers, suited to a variety of
situations and conditions. I recommend using them verbatim in the
beginning. Eventually you will get into the rhythm of the light work and

come up with your own prayer for the exact need you have. Don’t worry
about goofing up the exact wording. Yes, there is a nomenclature to the
light work, but as you work with it, it will come to you. Working with the
light will become an art as well as a spiritual exercise. If you can memorize
the light prayers, that’s great. If not, then simply read the prayers.
In working with the Divine Light, you can ask for the energy to bless a
particular chakra or center or any facet of the aura and consciousness. Or, as
you will often do, ask the light to bless all the centers, especially the four
centers emphasized in this book. This way you bless all facets of your
nature. Sometimes the attention goes to a particular facet of the
consciousness you know needs help, but as parts of the aura are
interconnected, you may find other facets that need help as well. By
including the four main centers you are covering a wide area of your
awareness.
As the light is being down-rayed to you, you may feel it as a rush of
energy or a tingling sensation. You may feel heat, depending on what it’s
doing and the degree of your sensitivity. I repeat, even if you feel nothing,
the light is still working for you. Eventually you will get into the feeling of
the light. If you sense resistance, don’t push against it. Be gentle, and go at
a pace you feel comfortable with. If you’re working with more than one
energy, give yourself a few minutes between energies to allow each one to
settle before calling on the next.
If you’re not sure about something, ask divine intelligence to guide you.
Don’t worry about hurting yourself if you choose the “wrong” energy.
Sometimes I have asked for one ray and seen a completely different ray
come in. Your Higher Self knows exactly what your needs are. Always ask
that you receive the light “to the degree of my need.” You can’t really
overdose on the light because the Higher Self watches that you get only
what you can handle, but you do want to be in the rhythm of the light work,
and saying this is helpful. In addition, you want to ask the light to touch into
“all levels of my consciousness.” This way, the light can be directed to
other areas of the aura that need work, in addition to the centers.
Step 6—Ground Yourself

After you have received the light, be still for a moment to let it stabilize
throughout your consciousness. This way, you are grounded in the light.
You don’t want to suddenly jump up and get on with your day. When you
feel that the light is established in you, ask that it be anchored into each
point, sealing in the light. It’s a good idea to ask that the golden ray of
protection surround the light you have just received. Through your
meditation, you have been blessed by the most precious energy of light. You
don’t want to lose that light or have it usurped. In closing, remember to use
the following prayer to thank the Higher Power for all the work done for
you, and to acknowledge all that you have received.
Closing Prayer
“I ask that the light I have just received be protected, sealed, and anchored
into my centers and all aspects of my aura. I thank Thee that this is so, and
so shall it ever be. So be it.”
Once you feel yourself grounded, get up and go on with your day.


CHAPTER 6
TAPPING THE POWER RAYS
NATURE IS FULL OF God’s bounty. Everywhere you look you can thrill to
God’s richness and splendor. Nature produces an almost endless variety of
physical creations—trees, flowers, insects, animals. Even physical light is
not just one color but many bands of colors. The same variety holds true for
spiritual light. There are myriad spiritual energies, each serving its own
purpose. You need this diversity because each power ray draws in a
different spiritual attribute, and there are many attributes of the spiritual life
you need to draw on. The ten power rays described in this chapter represent
ten different spiritual attributes to more deeply incorporate in your aura and
consciousness. These spiritual energies have been specially designed to help
you in your spiritual pursuits and all facets of life.
As you work with these rays, do your best to visualize their colors, as
this assists you in tuning into their holy attributes. If you are naturally
clairvoyant you may actually see the power; that’s great but not necessary
for an effective meditation. Your ability to receive the spiritual light will not
be diminished if you don’t spiritually see the energy. I have had students
questioning whether they really got the energy and wondering why they
couldn’t see the light while others could. Doubting is counterproductive, as
it can get in the way of receiving. Simply know that you are receiving.
These power rays are no fantasy. This is not an intellectual exercise or a
play of imagination. They are real. You really are drawing these energies to
you, and as you work with them, you will get into a place of knowing.
The duties of these color rays can overlap. Sometimes, the rose pink
love ray will purify negative energies more effectively than the orange-red
flame. Other times, the gold will come in for illumination, rather than the
pure white light. You’ll get into the feeling and sensing of exactly how to
use these rays. Best of all, your Higher Self knows just what you need. If

you call in one ray but another is more appropriate for you at that moment,
you will get what you need.
In describing these energies, a meditative prayer accompanies each ray.
These are general prayers that you can use anytime you need these power
rays. For example, if you’re feeling jittery, you can use the meditative
prayer for divine peace to calm yourself down. In the following chapters,
we’ll go into the various ways to work with the light in particular situations,
and the individualized meditative prayers that go with them.
The Light as Consciousness
As you work with Divine Light, remember what it is that the light is
actually doing for you. As we have explored, the Divine Light is the conduit
of consciousness. A conduit is a type of transmission or transportation
system. It brings something from one place to another. A pipe, for example,
is a conduit for water. It brings water to your home. Wire is a conduit for
electricity. It brings the electrical current from the power plant to your
house. In the same way, Divine Light is a transportation system to bring
consciousness from the divine source to all facets of creation. So it’s not the
light itself that is so transformative, it’s the divine consciousness that is in
the light that is so powerful.
When you are working with spiritual energy you are working with
consciousness. That consciousness is being transmitted from the divine
source to you to elevate and enlighten your awareness.
Purification
The power ray to use for spiritual purification is called the orange-red
flame. This ray is specifically designed to help release negative,
unenlightened energy in the aura. The dominant energy is orange, which is
the purifier, but the red is strong, too, which brings in purification quickly
and with great vitality. The orange-red flame purifies by “burning up”
negative energy in the aura. This ray breaks up the destructive energy into a
fine powdery substance called black and gray atoms. Once cut loose, the

unredeemed atoms are taken into the mineral kingdom, where they are
reconstituted in the Divine Light. Nothing is lost. Even defiled energy is
recycled.
Spiritual purification is essential in developing your aura. In physical
life, the body can build up many toxins from a variety of sources. It must
release these toxins or it will become increasingly polluted, stressed, and
diseased. In spiritual purification, you need to release spiritual toxins for the
aura to operate properly. These spiritual toxins are the negative energies you
have either created or picked up from others. Such energies linger in the
aura, disturbing and draining the entire energy field. Fortunately, the aura
has a built-in self-replenishing system that operates on an eight-hour cycle
to cleanse the energy field. Yet, sometimes this is not enough.
For example, say your aura is in great shape with no dark radiations to
speak of. But you get into an argument and unleash a huge outburst of
anger. The anger will change your aura, and some of those once-beautiful
energies will now become vitiated red. You have dirtied your aura as a
result of your emotional outburst. Eventually the negative radiations will
subside, but this will take time. Even with the spiritual self-cleansing
system working round the clock, an intense outburst of anger can take two
weeks to completely leave the aura! During those two weeks, you can be
susceptible to additional outbursts and other negative energies if you’re not
careful. If you succumb to more emotional outbursts, you build up more
negative energy, thus restricting the natural flow of the aura. If you’re not
vigilant, you can attract other kinds of destructive energies, compounding
the problem. The result can wreak havoc in your life, resulting in tension,
accidents, illnesses, and other problems.
The orange-red flame is usually the first step in effecting change. So
you’re going to be calling on this ray often. Purification is an almost daily
requirement; probably right up to the day you leave this world you’re going
to be purifying yourself. It’s almost impossible not to create or pick up
some negative energy along the way. There’s always something that wants
to come at you, and you can absorb these negative energies unintentionally.
With the orange-red flame, you don’t have to worry. This energy can get
you out of any spiritual entanglement. The orange-red flame is also an
essential tool for releasing the buildup of destructive energies accumulated
from the past. You’ll be using this spiritual scrub brush often in releasing
bad habits and faults. It’s a tremendous power ray. Without this energy,

humanity could never rise out of the negative energy it has created or
acquired.
Meditative Prayer for the Orange-Red Flame
“Down-ray the orange-red flame of purification to all levels of my
consciousness, releasing me from all black and gray atoms and taking them
into the mineral kingdom to be dissolved in the light.”
New Life Force
The ray to call on for new life force is the blue-white fire of eternal life.
This ray is very powerful and connected to what is called the “breath of
God.” It’s one of the highest energies you can use. If you have time to use
only one energy, use the blue-white fire. It’s a powerful, replenishing
energy that brings in new life force to your consciousness. It’s a spectacular
energy to see. The predominant color is a rich sapphire blue, almost like the
blue flame of a gas stove, with sparkles of white and silver light shooting
out, creating an electrifying effect. Again, it appears more like a ray than an
actual fire, but it works in you very much as a spiritual life-giving fire.
There are actually seven attributes to this power ray, and many times you
can see a kaleidoscope of colors moving with the blue and white, which is
why this ray is so beneficial.
The blue-white fire will be used very strongly in conjunction with the
orange-red flame. After you complete your spiritual purification, follow up
with the blue-white fire. Having finished using one ray, you are now
replenishing with another. The blue-white fire has an amazing capacity to
rejuvenate and charge up your aura, making other energies assimilate better.
Like pulling up weeds from your garden before planting new flowers, you
want to prepare the soil so the new seeds will grow well. Using the blue-
white fire is like tilling in new soil.
The blue-white fire is the single greatest healing energy there is. So if
you are using spiritual energy to help heal an illness or injury, you will use
this power ray a great deal. It helps alleviate pain and distress. It contributes

greatly in sustaining the physical body. Its power courses through the
physical organs and bloodstream. Without the blue-white fire, the physical
body would lose its vitality and not be able to function well. In essence, it’s
part of the cosmic life force, capable of healing and restoring life energy to
all areas of your being. In truth, the blue-white fire has many applications.
If you’re depressed, the blue-white fire can help lift you out of that
depressed state.
Meditative Prayer for the Blue-White Fire
“Down-ray the blue-white fire of eternal life, charging and recharging all
levels of my consciousness in a clockwise motion with new, electrifying life
force.”
Wisdom
The ray to call on for wisdom and illumination is the golden ray of wisdom
light. It appears as a brilliant golden ray and is the spiritual essence of the
dynamic power of God. Like the blue-white fire, there are many
applications for this holy power. You will use this energy a great deal in
conjunction with divine guidance. If you’re trying to make an important
decision, bring in the golden ray of wisdom light, especially to your mental
body, and ask for illumination to help you make the right choice. If you find
you’re wishy-washy in general, the golden ray is the energy that will help
you become more decisive.
Wisdom is one of the key attributes of a mature soul. True wisdom is
born of experience. It speaks of spiritual insight and knowledge, strength of
character, and strong moral fiber. A wise person makes decisions from a
place of inner knowing. Spiritual wisdom is a result of applied knowledge
and not repeated, drilled-in information. A student can memorize many
spiritual principles, but this doesn’t make him or her wise. Until that student
has assimilated the knowledge into his or her knowing, it’s not really
wisdom. There’s an old spiritual saying, “You know that you know that you
know.” It takes time to truly build wisdom. This is why an aura with the

predominant gold in it is one of the highest auras of all. It shows that the
soul has gone through countless experiences, tests, and trials and won the
victory of true spiritual knowledge and mastery.
The gold light is the most dynamic of all the rays, and you need to be
expressing your dynamic nature. It would be very hard to get anything
accomplished in this world, especially anything spiritual, without dynamic
energy.
Many people involved in spiritual work misunderstand the dynamic
nature of life. They often confuse being spiritually dynamic with being
humanly aggressive, and so they shy away from expressing their dynamic
nature. The dynamic nature of life is the “giving out” aspect—the builder
and the initiator of life. Being spiritually dynamic is a divine trait that
operates under the direction of divine will so that your actions are in
harmony with life. In this way, your actions are in no way detrimental to
others. It becomes a win-win situation. People who are dynamically active
radiate a beautiful golden light.
Because golden light is such a dynamic power, it has many applications.
The golden ray may be called upon to build a dynamic will, confidence,
courage, divine power, faith, and inner strength. It’s the best energy for
protection, even better than white light.
Meditative Prayer for Wisdom Light
“Down-ray the golden ray of wisdom light to all levels of my being,
bringing forth Thy wisdom and illumination and all the divine, dynamic
attributes of this power that I need now.”
Spiritual Love
The deep rose pink is the energy to call on for spiritual love. As the golden
ray brings in dynamic wisdom, will, and action, the deep rose pink draws in
love, compassion, and kindness. Its essence is the magnetic nature of God.
In the high spiritual realms there are basically two forces operating—Divine
Mind and Heart of Spiritual Love. Love is the bond that holds the universe

together. More than anything else, Divine Love brings you into oneness
with God. Once you are in that unity, you will have love for yourself and
compassion for others, because you will be connected to the source of love.
The love ray is one of the easiest energies to sense. When working with
it, you can feel its softness and gentleness. There’s often a feeling of bliss
when using this ray, and people see its energy more often than any other.
The deep rose pink ray may be used to create a more loving environment
for yourself and others around you. It can also work as a great healing
energy if you have been hurt or are feeling lonely or unloved. It’s an
essential energy to use in mending relationships, working on forgiveness,
increasing your trust and understanding, and becoming less selfish. It’s the
great healer of the soul and can mend the deepest of wounds to the heart.
All human fears, frustrations, loneliness, and worries can be dissolved
by the deep rose pink love ray. This Divine Love helps to inspire a selfless
attitude toward life. It is the pure unconditional love that gives without
thought of return. It’s the sacrificial love, the love of service to humanity.
This high love leads to the ultimate universal love of God, that loves all of
creation equally and unconditionally.
Meditative Prayer for Divine Love
“Down-ray the deep rose pink ray, quickening my spiritual centers and
filling my entire consciousness with this Thy love, bringing me into perfect
beauty, rhythm, and tone, as one body in Thy body of Divine Love.”
Divine Peace
The deep purple is the ray to call on for divine peace. There is also a gentler
version, which is violet in hue. The deep purple ray is essential for quieting
the mind and emotions. It seems the word most often used in the world
today is “peace.” People are crying out for peace. In this stressful and
fastpaced world, in the midst of the whirlwind, you need to quiet the
consciousness and commune with your own divine nature and God. The
only way to do this is to turn to God for your peace. This ray offers one of

the best ways to help you release the stress and strain of the world and to
get into that calm state. It releases any sense of burden or heavy-
heartedness.
This is the energy to call upon to bring you into the divine stillness, the
spiritual silence. When you’re at peace with yourself, there is no conflict.
There’s a relaxation in divine knowing. You can only be truly at spiritual
peace when you are in that divine knowing. A person with a lot of purple in
his or her aura is very advanced indeed because that person has truly let go
and let God take over.
Many people hold on to their worries and troubles to such a degree that
they leave no room for God to enter their lives. They let stresses burden
them to the point that they can barely function. When there’s a lot of
anxiety, the aura is affected. The energy doesn’t flow as it should and
becomes jagged and irregular. This ray can help smooth out these bumps in
the aura. It’s great for soothing the nerves. If you are grieving, or have
experienced something shocking, the purple ray is the energy to use to help
you come out of that grief.
Meditative Prayer for Divine Peace
“Down-ray the purple ray of divine peace, touching into all levels of my
consciousness and bringing me into the silence of peace and the peace of
silence.”
Balance and Harmony
The power ray to call on for balance and harmony is the emerald green ray.
Without harmony and a centering of the consciousness, nothing will work
right in your life. The more spiritually centered you stay, the easier things
will go for you. The emerald green ray helps balance and harmonize all the
different aspects of your life, so they move smoothly. In music, harmony is
defined as the blending of two or more musical sounds in a pleasing
manner. In the same way, you want the different departments of your life to

be moving well together. You can use this energy to help maintain balance
between mind, body, and soul.
The emerald green ray is very important in your day-to-day life. This
energy helps to keep your spiritual equilibrium, no matter what obstacles
you face. If you feel disoriented in your earthly affairs, call on this energy
to balance things out. You undoubtedly have many things going on at the
same time and need to keep them all moving smoothly. Maybe your home
life is fine, but your professional life is chaotic. Your relationship with your
friends may be strong, but not with your own family. You may have
suffered a trauma that threw your life out of balance. These are all situations
that need the emerald green ray. A person whose life is balanced will be
able to handle many things with efficiency and ease. There will be fewer
extremes in his or her life, and when extreme situations do come up, they
will have far fewer devastating effects.
Your Hermetic center is in particular need of this ray, as there is so
much activity in this center connected with the outside world. This energy
also helps to reverse counterclockwise movement in the aura.
Meditative Prayer for Balance and Harmony
“Down-ray the emerald green ray of balance and harmony to flow directly
into my centers and entire being, bringing me into perfect harmony of mind,
body, and soul.”
Divine Intelligence
The silver ray brings divine intelligence. Intelligence is different from
wisdom in that it is based strongly on perception. There are people who are
intelligent but not wise. Yet, you need intelligence to perceive wisdom. The
silver ray works strongly on the mental levels of the aura to quicken your
powers of perception. The silver ray facilitates clarity and is great for
quickening perception when you’re having trouble comprehending a lot of
information.

This ray accelerates progress. Say you have a business transaction that
seems to be dragging. It’s clear what has to be done, but there is endless red
tape. Papers are not getting signed, people are not returning phone calls.
You can call on the silver ray to quicken the whole process and break
through the stagnation. It’s a powerful ray when you need guidance in your
life. The silver ray works very well with gold, lemon yellow, and white
light. It helps to enhance the effectiveness of other rays, so that you receive
them more easily in the aura. You can call in this ray to help guide you
when you’re not sure which ray to use in your meditations.
A person who is utilizing his or her divine powers of intelligence will
have uncanny understanding and insights when facing the challenges and
problems that arise in life. Have you noticed how certain people seem to
handle pressure very well, making clear decisions that seem to turn out
right? This kind of person is very close to the divine consciousness of this
power, whether on a conscious or unconscious level.
Meditative Prayer for Divine Intelligence
“Down-ray the silver ray of divine intelligence to my mental body,
quickening my brain and flesh cells and all levels of my conscious
brain/mind thinking, sharpening my powers of perception.”
Concentration
The lemon yellow ray brings in powers of concentration. If you’re studying
for a test or trying to master a subject, this is an essential ray to call upon. It
gives you the ability to focus on a subject without distraction. As you build
this power, you will stimulate your ability to study and increase your
enjoyment of learning. If you need to dispel mental lethargy, this is the ray
to use. Although it’s primarily a mental energy, it may be used throughout
the aura to help steady the vibration and bring the energies into greater
order if they are scattered.
The lemon yellow ray is important in becoming a trained clairvoyant.
When I was developing my own clairvoyance, I spent nine months just

working on concentration to get me to the level that I needed to develop my
sustaining power. It’s difficult to hold certain clairvoyant perceptions for
any length of time. Without this level of concentration, I would not be able
to sustain my spiritual vision throughout a whole lecture—which may
include reading many auras.
Meditative Prayer for Concentration
“Down-ray the lemon yellow ray into my mental body, quickening my
conscious brain/mind thinking and bringing me powers of concentration.”
Prosperity
The turquoise ray is the spiritual energy of prosperity, abundance, and
supply. Its color is a bluish green, very much like the bluish shade of the
turquoise stone. If you believe you are lacking the spiritual awareness of
prosperity, this is the energy to work with. This power ray is especially
designed to help you build the consciousness and flow of unlimited wealth.
In physical life, there is often a tendency to limit oneself. This ray can help
you get out of the narrow-minded thinking of lack and limitation and
expand your horizons. With this power ray, you will step into an expanded
flow of light. This energy works well in all the centers, especially in the
Hermetic center, to multiply and amplify the positive conditions in your
life. It can help you to create more material abundance, as well as attract
friends, ideas, and assistance in building fresh new opportunities.
As explored in Chapter 10, prosperity consciousness is one of the
natural, inborn attributes of your consciousness. As a child of God, you
have the power to create prosperity. To express these gifts of abundance is a
matter of nurturing and developing those inborn qualities. If you’re lacking
in physical resources, it can mean you’ve disconnected from your spiritual
heritage. Somehow, the turquoise energy is not balanced in your aura. To
build your prosperity, you have to draw on this energy often. You must also
think, speak, and feel prosperous. It’s especially important to get into the
feeling of this energy; you need to feel wealthy to establish it in your

consciousness. Your emotional body needs to feel this spiritual richness,
whether your pocketbook agrees with you or not.
If you’re in a financial crunch, you can use this ray to build up a
positive spiritual flow that will help generate income. If you’re anxious
about money, you can work with this ray to build a more spiritual
consciousness of money. This way, your faith and knowing will carry you
through any financial rough times. If you are in the true consciousness of
prosperity, it won’t matter how much you have, because you are directly
connected to supply and know that you will always have what you need.
Meditative Prayer for Prosperity
“Down-ray the turquoise ray of abundance and supply, touching into my
Hermetic center and quickening persons, places, things, conditions, and
situations, bringing me into perfect prosperity.”
The Pure White Light
The pure white light is an elevating and redeeming energy. It brings in the
very essence of God. It has a tremendous ability to transmute negative
energies. If you have done something you know is wrong, you’ll want to
call on this energy to help lift you out of the dark energy you’ve created and
repair any harm you may have done to others. It doesn’t matter how deep
the pit you may have fallen into. The white light can help uplift you out of
any quagmire. This ray is strongly connected with your evolutionary climb.
The pure white light will bring you into the purity and holiness of the
God experience. It works beautifully with confrontation in relationships,
helping to lift you out of that abrasive energy. It’s essential to use during
sex to keep the energy moving on a high level. It’s one of the primary
energies to use in developing clairvoyance. The pure white light is an
illuminating and revelatory ray, especially when you’re asking for
illumination of a purely spiritual kind. It has protective properties, too, and
works well with the gold for that purpose.

Like the orange-red flame, the pure white light can release negative
energy, but it does this in a more gentle way than the orange-red flame. So
it is a good purifying energy if you’re feeling overly sensitive or resistant to
the orange-red flame. As mentioned, it particularly focuses on redeeming
energies. With negative energy you have a choice: you can either cut it
loose or transmute it. In redeeming negative energy, you’re restoring defiled
energy to its divine essence. It’s like the cells of the body. Some cells are
discarded when they are old and beyond use; others are replenished because
they’re still useful and can be restored, even if some impurities have
contaminated them.
Meditative Prayer for the Pure White Light
“Down-ray the pure white light to equalize, align, center, and attune all
levels of my consciousness, uplifting and bringing me into the purity of Thy
oneness.”


CHAPTER 7
GUIDELINES FOR EFFECTIVE
MEDITATIONS
IN THE BEGINNING, WORKING with these rays may take a little getting used to.
You have to become familiar with the whole process, as well as comfortable
with the greater flows of energy you will be receiving. Yet, once you get
into the rhythm of the light, it will quickly become second nature. What you
are actually doing in the Higher Self meditation is following the natural
course the light takes in reaching you. By working in conscious cooperation
with this natural process, you’re simply enhancing the spiritual power you
can receive.
A wonderful artistry unfolds as you get into the rhythm of working with
the light. In the beginning, speaking the words might feel like a recitation,
but eventually those words will feel like your very soul expressing itself.
The nomenclature of the light work will become your sacred language, and
you’ll find your own form and beauty of expression. Also, give yourself
time to get used to the greater vibrations of light you’ll be receiving. It will
come in small doses in the beginning until you’re acclimated to this new
level of spiritual activity.
In your transformative process, the light essentially does three-fourths
of the work while your own hard work takes care of the other fourth. The
three-fourths entails a whole intricate process of sending the light to you.
Your part consists in doing the spiritual meditations and, above all, keeping
yourself as strong and as balanced a channel of light as possible. You can’t
work with the light by day and debauch yourself by night. I’ve had students
say they decided not to work with the light because it was too much effort!
As if all one had to do was wish for something to happen, and it would. As
they say, “If wishes were horses, then beggars could ride!” You have to do
your best to become the example of what you wish to be.

Some common questions I’ve been asked include how long one should
meditate with light and how many rays can be brought in during a
meditation. When starting out, meditating for approximately twenty minutes
is excellent. You can build this to thirty minutes or more, once or twice a
day, if you are motivated. Another thing to consider is not only the length of
the meditation but the depth. When you finish a meditation, you should feel
different from when you started. Meditating with Divine Light is an
experience. If you step deeply into the meditative state and really tune into
the spiritual energies, time will stand still.
As far as how many rays to meditate with at one time, usually three to
four energies is excellent when starting out. Leave yourself a little breathing
room between energy rays. Yet, again, the real question to consider is: how
many of these living powers can you embody and express at one time?
Remember, you need to apply the light for it to take hold. If you call in the
deep rose pink ray of spiritual love, really embody that love consciousness,
and be loving in your expression of this power, then you will have a much
more successful meditation than if you were to bring in many rays but not
really apply their powers. So pace yourself. Start simple to get into the
rhythm of working with spiritual energy and build from there.
People have asked me how many meditations it takes to clear something
from the aura. The answer depends on several factors. First, how deep is the
situation? A recent irritation will clear more quickly than a long-term
resentment. Another factor is the determination of the individual. A
lackluster approach to light work will be far less effective than a single-
minded approach. Another challenge is the element of backsliding. In a
perfect world, even the most tangled of energies could be cleared in a
relatively short time. Yet, in practice, there is almost always a seesaw effect.
The light process begins, but then something reenergizes the negative
condition, and the light process must begin again. This can go on for some
time before the momentum swings in favor of the light.
Think of the light work as pouring clean water into a cup that’s filled
with dirty water. If you keep pouring clean water, eventually all the dirty
water will be displaced, and there will be only clean water. Generally, a
single isolated negative energy in the aura that has not gained momentum
can be cleared in five to ten effective meditations.

Understanding the Definition of Spiritual Energy
Too many people misunderstand how the light works. They think the light
is like taking a pill: Once done, it works automatically. Your support of the
spiritual power you bring in will be the key to your success. To do this, take
time to understand the definition of spiritual energy as the conduit of
consciousness.
Let me give an example of this with the turquoise ray. This is a favorite
energy to work with. When people who are not familiar with the aura learn
there is an actual power ray of prosperity, they are excited. They call on this
ray a great deal and mistakenly think miracles will automatically happen.
And while wonderful things can happen, they need to better understand
how this works.
Let’s say you are at your dining room table doing your monthly bills.
You have your accumulated income for the month on one side and you have
the bills on the other. It turns out you have more bills than income for that
month. If you’re not careful, anxiety and fear can creep in. You can fall into
a poverty consciousness and start to panic. You can’t pay all your bills—
you don’t have enough money—what will you do? These thoughts flood
your head and stress quickly starts to build. This is a common scenario most
of us have been in at one time or another.
But let’s look at this scene from the point of view of consciousness and
Divine Light. Regardless of what the physical situation is, in your distress
where is your consciousness directed? It’s focused on your fear and worry
over money. Let’s say that before doing your finances, you didn’t realize
how overextended you were. You were feeling fine until this realization hit
you. And now your attention has been redirected to a distressed state. This
state of worry will be reflected in your aura because the aura is reflecting
your consciousness.
Now let’s say you realize you let yourself fall into a state of financial
anxiety and know you have to get out of it. You realize it’s time to work
with the Divine Light. You go into meditation and bring in the turquoise ray
of abundance and supply. This is the God consciousness, the divine attribute
of the infinite supply of wealth. Say you have the best meditation of your
life. As this power ray comes down and infuses your aura, your fears and
worries about money disappear. Through your light work, you have

redirected your consciousness away from your financial concerns and you
have embraced the wealth consciousness of God. When you finish your
meditation, you feel great. You feel like a king and money is no longer a
concern.
In this uplifting state of being, you finish your meditation, give your
thanks to the divine for this blessing, get up, and walk out of the room you
were meditating in, back to the dining room where you were working. And
there are the bills still on the table untouched! At this moment, you have a
choice. You can walk into that room full of the divine power of God, see the
unpaid bills, and say, “Crap, what am I going to do? I still can’t pay my
bills. The meditation did nothing.” In other words, you can fall back into the
state of worry and stress that you were in before you brought in the Divine
Light. Seeing that the physical situation hasn’t changed, you can get all
worked up again.
By reacting in this way, you’d be counteracting all the good light work
you just did. You’d be letting the divine bless you with this consciousness
of wealth, but then right away dispelling that divine blessing by reigniting
your worry and distress. Plus, because the light didn’t immediately change
your situation, you may even start to feel that your meditation was
ineffectual. In the end, you’d be right back where you started from.
There is another choice in this scenario, another way to react. When you
come out of your effective meditation, full of the God power of wealth,
feeling connected to your divine source, you can walk into the dining room,
see the bills on the table, but now affirm the divine blessing—regardless of
how things appear—by acknowledging it with something like, “I refuse to
allow the appearance of this situation to unbalance the divine consciousness
of prosperity within me. I am prosperity. I hold to the consciousness of
God’s infinite wealth. I refuse all thoughts of lack and limitation.” In other
words, you recognize that, in consciousness, you are not the same person
you were before the meditation. The situation may not have immediately
changed, but you have changed. You are now in a higher state of
consciousness. You are dynamic because you have the dynamic power in
you, and you refuse to surrender that power.
By doing this you sustain the spiritual power just given to you. Then
you will start thinking of ways to take care of your financial obligations,
ways to turn things around. You won’t see yourself as a victim. You will
take charge of your life. Then, by the spiritual laws of life, if you sustain

that inner divine power, eventually the outer world will reflect that inner
truth. It has to; that’s the divine law. If you hold to the consciousness of
prosperity and act on that awareness, your financial situation will heal and
turn around. For some, this can happen quickly. For others, it can take time
depending on the dynamics of the situation, but it will turn around if you
stay the course.
In practice it’s not so easy to do this. This is why daily meditation is so
necessary. It helps build and sustain spiritual momentum.
Effects of the Light Process—the Light in Action
Applying the light in your life means two things: holding to the
consciousness of the light you called on, and following through with
physical activities that support that consciousness. If you tune into the
divine power of the light in meditation and think that’s enough, you’re not
employing the light. You’re here in physical life to do things. On the other
hand, if you hastily take actions without holding to the consciousness of the
light you’re working with, that is less effective as well. The results will be
mixed or disappointing. Consciousness and action must be aligned. Be
persistent in sustaining high consciousness of action until results start to
show.
Most times, the meditation process is a catalyst for change. It generates
the initial movement of spiritual energy that begins the transformational
process. It’s a little like a tiny snowball rolling down a snow-packed hill—it
generates momentum and grows bigger and bigger. The light work gets the
ball rolling. The initial destination for the light is the energy centers. The
light comes down from the Higher Self to the extent that we need it and
does the job it was designed to do. When it is finished, it withdraws and
returns to its source of emanation. During this process, light is retained in
the energy centers, where it shows up as active emanations; it is these
emanations that can really help to get the ball rolling. (See color Illustration
7.1.)

The Divine Light Process: Illustration 7.1
But this energy is a blessing; it’s not actually part of your aura yet. To
make this energy part of your aura, you need to apply the power you have
called on. This is why it’s critical to use the energy you receive right away,
or it begins to fade. As you integrate this power in your aura through use, it
becomes part of your aura and you will truly transform that part of your life.
Over time and with constant effort, the aura takes on a whole new glow
and vibration with the Higher Self meditation. One very dramatic example
of this process could be seen in a woman I counseled before I began
teaching full-time. I was working at an insurance company at the time, and

she worked in my department. I didn’t tell people I could see the aura at that
point. Yet, since I could see problems, I would try to help people in an
indirect way, or I would occasionally teach some of the principles to friends
who were really in need and open to such ideas. I had to be careful, as I was
doing this at a time before metaphysical ideas were as accepted as they are
today.
I could see in this woman’s aura that she had problems. One day, I
asked in a casual way if something was bothering her, and she told me her
troubles. It turned out her husband of thirteen years had just up and left her
with six children to care for. They’d married when she was only seventeen,
and now she was barely thirty and on her own with six children. Deeply
shaken, she had fallen into a serious depression.
Her depression showed clearly in her aura. (See color Illustration 7.2.)
Her mental center was spinning counterclockwise, and there was a creamy
energy around it, showing mental confusion. In addition, there was a gray
cloud above her head, denoting intense worry. The fanning rays in all of her
centers were gray, the very color of her depressed thoughts and feelings.
She also had dark blue active radiations emanating from her Hermetic
center, expressing her gloom-and-doom attitude. Proceeding from her
emotional center were avocado green active emanations, showing she was
developing some darker emotions of deceit. This expressed in her trying to
see what she could get away with on the job and in her personal life.

Releasing Depression with Spiritual Energy: Illustration 7.2
The orange-red flame and blue-white fire rays were used to cut loose
depression and the pessimistic assumption that she would never find
another love. Emerald green light gave her balance because desertion had
left her shaky and very disoriented. The deep rose pink was needed to boost
her self-esteem. This was probably the hardest part for her. More painful
than the anger toward her husband was the feeling that no one would ever
want her again. The fact was, she was still a young and attractive woman,
and there was no reason she would not fall in love and marry again. I told

her there was an excellent chance that she would remarry. She’d always
answer, “Who would want me, with six children?”
After about eight months from the start of this whole process, her aura
looked great. The dark clouds and muddied areas were completely gone.
Her mental body was sharp and clear. Instead of gray clouds, there were
now silver diamond points of light, attesting to the development of much
keener powers of perception. Lemon yellow fanning energy coming from
her mental center showed alert and focused thinking. Her Hermetic center
had emerald green fanning rays, illustrating the balance and harmony she
had achieved in her life. There were beautiful bright blue active emanations
coming from this center as well, signifying dedication and loyalty to her
children. Her emotional division was also in great shape. There was a
beautiful rosy pink fanning energy coming from her emotional center,
expressing her new love of life. There were also bright blue active
emanations in this center, showing the now-steadfast and stable quality of
her emotions. Of course, her whole outlook on life was much rosier.
One day as we were having lunch, I saw the image of a man in her auric
field. I couldn’t see any specific features, but I intuitively felt that this was a
man she would meet. I told her, “You’re going to get married!”
She looked at me incredulously and said with an amused laugh, “Who’s
going to marry me with six children!”
“I don’t know,” I said. “But you’re going to meet someone soon.”
Before a month had passed, she received an invitation to her high school
reunion. She went, and there she met an old high school sweetheart. It
turned out he had married, fathered two children, and was also divorced.
The attraction was still there. A month later, she married him, with her six
children and his two children participating in the wedding ceremony, the
littlest girl being the flower girl! This experience had a profound effect on
me as well. Helping her marked the beginning of my teaching career
because, from then on, this woman kept telling people, “I don’t know what
that Barbara knows but she knows something!” As a result of her
prompting, I began conducting some of my first public metaphysical
lectures.
Developing a Spiritual Point of View

One other point I wish to reemphasize is the importance of working with
the light from the spiritual point of view. Remember that life works from
the inside out. Everything we experience in physical life was first created
on the spiritual plane. This is why the aura comes first in any
transformation. What often hinders our spiritual unfoldment and lessens the
effectiveness of our connection with the light is that we look at life from a
physical point of view. Even when it comes to spiritual matters, most of our
knowledge and understanding is perceived and interpreted through the five
senses. I have seen the aura described as an electromagnetic field, as if it
were only a radiation of the physical body. People have tried to equate
spiritual light with physical light. It’s natural to do this because we’re
comfortable and most familiar with our physical surroundings and
experiences.
The spiritual light and aura will make little sense if viewed strictly from
the physical standpoint, because the Divine Light is not of the physical
world. It can greatly affect the physical world but the light is part of the
inner, spiritual world. Although the spiritual and physical worlds are part of
the whole of life, in practice they operate very differently.
The spiritual world is the creative world, the originating world. It’s the
world of God. Everything we see physically was conceived and originated
in the spiritual world. So the spiritual dimension existed before the physical
one. It’s from this divine source that we draw the light, and it’s in this
spiritual life that the aura exists and is perceived. Because the spiritual
world is the original world, it is not dependent on the physical life for its
survival: its life is independent of physical existence.
In addition to being creative, the spiritual world sustains life as well. It
sustains all life on Earth, including each one of us. Without this divine
power holding the universe together, all of creation would cease to exist in
an instant. The spiritual world is, therefore, in a constant state of giving.
The divine voluntarily pours out its life that others may partake, which
places us in intimate and constant contact with the source of our being.
There is great joy in this process because it is in giving that there is
creating. This creative nature of giving is the essence of our spiritual
character as well. When we are spiritually minded, we are always creative,
original, and in a selfless state of giving.
The physical world, on the other hand, is a created world. It’s the result
of creative acts that originated in the spiritual realms. It has no power of its

own. Without the spiritual world to nourish and sustain it, the physical
world could not maintain its form and would return to its source of
emanation. Because of this, the physical world is in a constant state of
receiving. In receiving life from the spiritual world, the matter of the
physical world is organized and sustained. So, the nature of physical life is
to take. As spirit wants to give, matter wants to take. The physical world
will seek to draw into itself all it can to maintain itself and will resist any
idea that compromises that goal. Form is always seeking to hold its own. In
this way, it’s inherently selfish. It depends on this holding power to survive.
The same is true of us. If we are thinking only physically, we will always be
narrow-minded, selfish, and with no true understanding of what we’re
doing to our fellow man.
The secret of understanding your aura lies in the recognition that if life
is first spiritual, then it follows that you are, above all, a spiritual being.
This means that the same attributes that apply to the spiritual world apply to
you. Your spiritual character, then, is the essence of who you are. It’s the
core of your being, the real you. And all the spiritual qualities you admire
are already your true nature.
The only reason you’re not automatically aware of your divine nature is
that you’re in a process of spiritual unfoldment. This unfoldment is part of
your design. The divine attributes in you are potential powers, waiting to be
developed. And as you develop these powers, they become more and more
a part of your active life. If your life does not presently reflect the spiritual
essence within you, it’s only because you have yet to develop those
qualities.
The part of your spiritual essence that’s unfolding is what we call the
soul. The soul is like a seed planted in the ground. A seed starts out as a tiny
thing. Yet, all the potential for developing into a beautiful rose or a mighty
oak tree is already there. All that is needed are the right elements in which
to grow: air, water, sun, and earth. The seed, if nourished and undisturbed,
cannot help but become that great flower or tree. In the same way, your soul
is like a seed that God plants in the garden of creation. All the potential for
realizing its divine nature is already in the core of the soul. To realize that
potential, the soul must embark on a pilgrimage through creation, where it
grows and eventually makes its way back, fully realized, to God. And like
the plant that needs water, the soul needs the spiritual nourishment of
Divine Light to grow.

To effectively change something, you must start from the spiritual
foundation, even though it may seem unrelated to your immediate physical
problems. By working from a spiritual perspective, you can improve
anything. Problems, character flaws, and dilemmas are the result of a
disconnection from the divine root of life. Fix the connection, and you
correct the problem.


PART III
Unfolding Your Spiritual Power


CHAPTER 8
HOW TO CHANGE MENTAL AND
EMOTIONAL STATES
THOUGHTS AND EMOTIONS ARE the most important areas in which to begin
your auric transformation. You will find that the majority of problems in
your life stem from some unhealthy thought or emotion lurking somewhere
in your consciousness. For that matter, most of the problems in the world
today can be traced to wrong thinking and feeling. By working on these
areas, you will be adding immeasurably to uplifting your aura and relieving
yourself of much stress.
A negative mental or emotional condition is never permanent—you can
change any condition you find yourself in. It doesn’t matter if a thought or
emotion appears overwhelming or has been with you for a long time.
Because these negative states are not the spiritual reality of who you are,
they can be transformed. In the same way, you are in control of your
reaction to outside influences. No one can tell you how to think or feel
unless you permit that to happen. Yet, this is exactly what many people do.
They let others run their lives, and then wonder why they have problems.
Fortunately, the Divine Light is extremely effective in transforming
mental and emotional states and cutting loose those negative energies at
their core. If you’re careful not to re-create negative conditions, you will be
clear of destructive momentum altogether. The light can also help to build
new spiritual power that sustains high levels of positive thinking and
feeling.
The first step in your process of transformation is to recognize that the
spiritual part of you is the true guiding force behind your entire thinking
and feeling. If you try to divorce thoughts and emotions from their spiritual
foundation, you will be creating wrong thinking and feeling that will take
on a life of their own. This can only produce problems, and you will never

receive the answers that you seek. You may see the problem, but its
resolution will always elude you because you are not connecting with the
source that can really help you.
Thoughts and emotions have enormous power in the auric field.
Together, they play a vital role in keeping consciousness moving
harmoniously. The mental and emotional divisions are also where you see
the greatest fluctuations in the aura. This is especially true of the mental
division because you’re always thinking about something. As you change
the tendency of your thoughts, your auric colors change, and as you
emotionally react to your thoughts, your emotional colors change as well.
The thoughts of an unenlightened mind are like monkeys in a cage going all
over the place. This is exactly the way it looks in the aura—chaotic and
disoriented. Of course, the emotions will react accordingly.
In working with thoughts and emotions, keep in mind the following
principle; it describes the fundamental operating relationship between your
mental nature and your emotional nature. This principle is always in action
and by understanding it, you will possess the key to creating the
mental/emotional harmony you seek. This principle can be stated simply as:
Think ➞ Feel ➞ Do
First you conceive something mentally, then you have an emotional
response to that thought. Based on that reaction, you act. This sequence of
activity is so simple, yet so many times the relationship is confused—with
disastrous results.
In the spiritual context, the mental part of you is the director of your
consciousness. It is the part that’s meant to guide your emotions. The
emotional, feeling part of you is the doer. An emotion doesn’t just happen;
there has to be a thought behind it. I first have to think, “I love this,” or “I
hate this,” for me to react to that thought emotionally. From this emotional
response will come action.
Thoughts—the Kingdom Within

In the New Testament, when confronted by the Pharisees as to when the
kingdom of God would arrive, Jesus gave them an answer they were not
expecting: “The kingdom of God cometh not with observation…for,
behold, the kingdom of God is within you” (Luke 17:20–21). This
statement has come to be interpreted in different ways. For some, it means
acknowledging the God presence or divine spark within. For others, it
means to look within rather than to the outside for change. These are all
wonderful interpretations, but in understanding thoughts, this statement is a
particularly important revelation.
In metaphysics, your mental body is the kingdom within. It’s the
kingdome, the dome being the head, which houses your thoughts. Your
mental division is the highest part of your conscious nature. It bridges your
higher Divine Self and your lower human self. The mental body is the
deciding factor in your evolution as to whether you will rise up into higher,
Divine Self or stay in the lower self.
How you think controls the rest of you. So, the first place to make
changes in your life is in your thinking. If you know how to think, you
know how to live. Mind is the builder. You imagine, design, and create
everything in your life from mind first. Thoughts create the world you live
in and every aspect of your nature. The entire universe was a divine idea
before it was a physical reality. So by redesigning your thoughts, you can
redesign any part of your life. Without mind, you’re like an amoeba. This is
why you must keep your thinking sharp and refuse to become slack in this
area. Thoughts are far more than just little currents of electrical activity in
the brain. They are living entities with energy behind them.
Thoughts are as real as your physical body. They are more real, in fact,
because there is less constriction with thoughts. They create as you permit
them to enter your consciousness and become part of you. Enlightened
thoughts can take the form of radiant crown jewels of light. They shimmer
with pearl luster colors and beautify the aura. Devolved thoughts can take
hideous forms, choking and constricting the auric field. The sad fact is that
most of us are confused in our thinking. Even when we think we’re clear,
there can be confusion or delusion. The key to dealing with negative
thoughts is to remember that they are artificial in origin. They were created
at some moment in time, somewhere in your experience, but they are not
part of your true nature. At some point, you entertained and accepted a false
perception, creating a dark thought and allowing that thought to take root.

Thought is the first step in the think-feel-do process. Mind always
comes first. Some people try to reverse this process by putting their
emotions first. Yet, even when you “act without thinking” you still have to
give yourself mental permission to do so. So thought still comes first, even
when you permit your emotions to run rampant. It’s ignorance of this
principle that can mess things up and permit your emotions to rule your
thoughts, instead of the way it was meant to be.
In metaphysics, there are three levels to our thinking self. These are the
higher (divine) mind, the conscious mind, and the subconscious mind.
When we’re dealing with change, we’re using our conscious mind. The
conscious mind is our intellectual mind. Its focus of power is, as we have
explored, in the mental center. The conscious mind is the part of us that
reasons things through. It has the power to accept or reject thoughts. The
conscious mind is the part of us that exercises our free will by making
conscious choices. You can be reading this book and rejecting or accepting
the ideas presented. No one can take that right away from you without your
consent. By your acceptance or rejection, you’re either altering or
reinforcing your perceptions, and hence your experiences of life.
The word “conscious” is very important. It indicates the ability to be
self-aware. We have to be self-aware to make a conscious choice. Animals
make choices, but they do it instinctually. They have yet to develop the
capacity for self-awareness. We also have the subconscious, but of course,
we’re not self-aware of our subconscious mind unless we bring something
from our subconscious to our conscious mind. We have our instinctual
levels as well, but these are also subordinate to our conscious thinking.
God gave us this ability to choose in order to learn the difference
between right and wrong, to distinguish the enlightened from the
unenlightened. We are learning how to embrace the enlightened thoughts
that strengthen the mental body, and we are also learning how to reject the
negative thoughts and energies of others, as well as our own. Until we
really learn this lesson, the lines may be blurred. Very often we
unintentionally accept negative ideas and reject good ideas, then pay the
price down the line when the effects of our thoughts are not to our liking.
Eventually, by trial and error, we learn the difference and enlighten the
mind.
As the mental body becomes more enlightened, spiritual power can
establish itself more easily. The light expands, creating radiant colors and

bands of light. The beauty of enlightened thinking is its effortlessness.
There’s clarity, decisiveness, and true inspiration when the conscious mind
is enlightened. This is the goal of our thinking. Look back on times when
you were in a very clear mental state, and remember how well things went.
It all seemed effortless, didn’t it? That’s the state of mind you’re meant to
be in on a regular basis.
Most of us bog down our conscious mind with a lot of stuff we really
don’t need, or we ask it to do things it’s incapable of doing. The conscious
mind also becomes colored and conditioned to think along certain lines and
in habitual closed loops. Upbringing, environment, and our own mental
tendencies create this conditioning. As the mental body gets weighed down
with negative thoughts, it becomes harder for the Divine Light to get
through. The mind become confused and clouded and moves further away
from the clarity of enlightened thinking.
Spiritual Energy and Thoughts
Abraham Lincoln is purported to have said, “Most folks are as happy as
they want themselves to be.” In other words, you create the parameters of
what you will and will not allow yourself to do, and you do this through
your thinking. You must recognize that, in whatever state you find your
thinking, you can always change that thinking if you so desire. You are in
control of your thinking! If you have relinquished that control, you must
reclaim it. Then get the attention off your particular negative preoccupation
and concentrate on a positive quality or trait that you want to have. If you
have a persistent bitter thought about someone, you obviously don’t want to
start your meditation thinking of all the ways in which you dislike that
person. You need to see yourself free of that bitterness and hatred. Better
yet, simply see yourself in a place of spiritual love where that bitterness
doesn’t exist.
You will be working a lot with the orange-red flame to cleanse the
mental center. Not only can this power ray cut loose specific negative
thoughts, it can also cut through clouds of negative energies that may
encircle you. You can work with the orange-red flame to release specific
destructive thoughts or to conduct a general mental cleansing. The
following meditative prayer is excellent for general cleansing. Use it

anytime you feel mentally clouded or confused. If you’ve had a tough day
at work or at home and you don’t know which end is up, this is a great
meditative prayer to use. Also use this meditation if you’re trying to clear
your mind before making an important decision. I suggest that you
memorize it; let it become your anthem for cleansing the mental body.
Meditative Prayer for Mental Purification
“Down-ray the orange-red flame of purification into my mental body,
releasing me from all mental confusions, illusions, delusions, all
superimposed, distorted, and upside-down images. Let it out-ray in all
directions, freeing me of all mental bombardments and impingements. I ask
that all these black and gray atoms be dissolved in the mineral kingdom, in
the light.”
Feel and sense that flame going into the nucleus of your mental center
and out-raying throughout your whole mental division, bathing it in this
flaming light and breaking up all negative energies. If you can visualize or
actually see the process happening, all the better. Feel and sense those black
and gray atoms being released from you and see those atoms going directly
into the mineral kingdom, dissolved in the light and forever out of your
consciousness.
From the mental center, let the light shower your throat, Hermetic, and
emotional centers to clear out any interconnecting debris. Let the light fill
and activate these other centers, while also dissolving any negative energy
in the mineral kingdom.
You may be surprised at how much negativity you’ve been holding in
and how good it feels to let it all go. You don’t have to qualify or justify
anything. If it’s a negative energy, you want it out of your life. As the
orange-red flame is releasing negative thoughts, images or emotions may
pop up unexpectedly. This is all part of the releasing process and simply
means the light is doing its job. Look at these images as if they were a
movie that you’re just watching. Acknowledge them for what they are, but
give them no power. If you feel inspired, you can name any specific thought
you want released as it comes up. Simply add at the end of the meditative

prayer: “Free me of . . .” and name the thought you want to be released
from.
This purifying work can take on the quality of a confessional,
discharging whatever torrent of negative thoughts you have been holding in.
This is the time to surrender it all to the Divine Light, to the very altar of
God. You may receive revelations you didn’t expect. And yes, the old part
of you may fight to hold on to those dark thoughts, but just keep letting go.
Before going on to the recharging process, let’s look at some of these
negative thoughts more closely.
Confusions
This word comes from the Latin, meaning “to mix together.” Confused
thinking comes about when two or more thoughts vie for attention and
supremacy. You may be telling yourself you want something and at the
same time telling yourself the thing you want isn’t good for you. These
conflicting thoughts create confusion in your thinking, and the result is
inaction. Confusion shows up in the aura mainly as a creamy energy similar
to the tan colors of lethargic thinking.
Illusions
Illusions are ideas and perceptions that you have accepted as real, but which
are not real. At some point or another, we all have illusions about
something. Most of the time, we’re unaware we’re in an illusionary state.
When you wear rose-colored glasses about someone, you’re in an
illusionary state. You can have illusions about your parents, friends, love
interests, and yourself. There can be a feeling of disappointment and
disillusionment when your bubble bursts. Nevertheless, part of the beauty
of spiritual work is stepping out of these illusions and into greater realities.
Delusions
Delusion is similar to illusion, but there is more intent in delusions, more
purposeful action. You delude yourself because you don’t want to face

something and you choose to escape from it. You might be under the
delusion that things are fine at your job, when they are not. Or you might
delude yourself into thinking you have great talents or abilities, when in fact
you don’t.
Superimposed Images
If you take two images, place one on top of the other, and look at them,
you’ll see a jumbled mess. This is an example of superimposed images. I
may hold a wonderful image of something, and then you come along and
tell me that what I love is terrible. If I accept your image, I now have a
conflict with the image I’ve held. Superimposed images tend to come from
the outside rather than being self-imposed.
Distorted Pictures
Here you’re twisting things out of their natural shape, creating scenarios
that may have little or no bearing on reality. Paranoid people most often
have distorted pictures of things, painting normal situations as doomsday
scenarios.
Upside-Down Pictures
This is seeing something as the total opposite of what it really is, as in
“Greed is good” or “Wrong is right.” Upside-down thinkers have taken their
distorted pictures to the extreme. This kind of thinking can be very
dangerous. You see a friend where there is an enemy. Note how satanic
imagery often involves inverting images to mean their opposite, as in
upside-down pentagrams and crosses. This is no accident but rather a
deliberate intent to invert natural laws for unnatural purposes.
Mental Bombardments
These are thoughts coming at you from the outside world. It could be
people thinking negatively of you, knowingly or unknowingly. The problem

with bombardments is you don’t usually know they’re coming. You may
believe you’re “under the weather” when actually you’re under attack. This
is why spiritual protection is so important.
Impingements
Whereas bombardments can come at you from anywhere and everywhere,
impingements are much more targeted. They come at you like stilettos,
sharp and pointed, penetrating your aura. Certain people are very sharp in
their thinking, and you can feel it. Impingements are not as common as
bombardments but are still something to watch out for.
Once you’ve finished your purification, bring in the blue-white fire.
This energy will recharge the areas depleted by the negative thoughts. It
will also serve as new spiritual soil, making room for a fresh crop of new
thoughts and ideas.
Meditative Prayer for Recharging the Mental Body
“Down-ray the blue-white fire of eternal life to charge and recharge all
depleted areas in my conscious brain/ mind thinking with new life force,
breathing in new spiritual thinking.”
Give yourself time with the blue-white fire. You may feel a shifting and
upliftment as it’s doing its work. Again, feel and sense this energy radiating
out from the mental center in all directions, charging and recharging all
levels of the mental division and out-raying through the brain cells, drawing
in new life force.
See that electrifying life force sparking new currents of divine life into
all aspects of your mental being. Again, let it touch into the other centers as
well. Once you’ve replenished yourself with the blue-white fire, you can
begin your building-up process. The key rays to work with are silver, lemon
yellow, gold, and white light. Silver brings in greater powers of perception
and a faster-thinking mind. The lemon yellow brings in powers of
concentration, especially if there’s been disorientation or laxness. Gold

carries new wisdom, inner strength, and whatever dynamic qualities are
needed. White light is especially good for lifting all the vibratory
frequencies to bring in greater powers of illumination and vision.
After your meditation, watch your tendency of thought. Are your
thoughts more positive, or are you still in the same negative state? Follow
up your light work with positive action to establish new, constructive
thinking, giving the light you have attracted the chance to express in every
area of your life.
Emotions—the Spiritual Motor
Emotions give life to thoughts. They are the engines that propel thoughts
into action. Once an emotion is wed to a thought, that thought has
tremendous power and will move into motion. To put anything into action,
you need the combined effort of mind and emotions. You may have a dream
to be an artist or a doctor, but unless you attach a strong emotion to that
dream, it has no chance of becoming real. Emotions may be likened to
gunpowder, and thoughts to bullets. Without the firepower of gunpowder,
the bullet will just sit in the chamber, no matter how intently we point and
pull the trigger. Mind designs the plan of what is to be created, but once that
design is in place, it is the emotions that get the energies going to realize
that design.
It’s not easy to balance emotions with thoughts. We tend to lean one
way or the other. Those who stay too much in the mental are more
intellectual and will conceive more than they create. “Doers,” who stay too
much in the emotional, can often paint themselves into corners because they
don’t think before they leap. Balance the two in a positive way, and you’re
steady, focused, and dynamic.
Emotions do not think. This is perhaps the single most important thing
to remember about emotions. Emotions feel. That’s their job. Emotions
need thoughts to guide them. Have you ever tried to reason with a person
who’s in a rage? You can’t, because that person is not operating from a
thinking level at that moment. It’s emotions talking. You have to approach
the person gently, from a loving place. Let him or her calm down so the
thinking levels are back in action; then you can communicate.

Your emotions are meant to flow in clear streams of love, compassion,
inner strength, and all the higher attributes of life. In this mode, the
emotional division of the aura radiates tremendous light. When you’re in
your higher emotions, you’re expressive, and others are attracted to your
positive emotional force field. Yet, many times emotions are filled with
hates, jealousies, fears, and angers. When you are in these dark states, your
aura is darkened and weighed down, and the energies move out in a
swirling, chaotic manner.
You have to really work at rooting out negative emotions. You can’t just
say, “I’m not angry,” for example, when trying to deal with anger. You have
to free yourself of that anger, because that anger will be smoldering inside,
waiting for a chance to express itself. As with thoughts, the Divine Light
can reach into the root of negative emotions and release them. Often when
you think you’re operating from your mind levels, you’re actually moving
from your emotions. In this condition, you’re bound to make wrong
decisions. Most people live nearer their emotional self than their mental self
and allow their emotions to rule their thoughts. When you make decisions
solely by your emotions, it’s like throwing yourself to the wind. It may
blow you where you need to go or it may not.
For example, say you are the manager of a company and decide to fire
one of your employees. You give several good reasons why you must do so,
and you claim to regret the decision. However, on closer examination, it
becomes clear that job performance is not the real issue. The truth is, you’re
jealous. Although new to the job, the person you wish to fire shows great
potential, and you’re afraid that once your superiors catch wind of how
good this employee really is, he may be promoted above you. So by getting
rid of him, you’re no longer threatened. Since you refuse to see yourself as
a jealous person, you have to come up with a plausible reason for firing
him, one that you can believe. So you scrutinize his performance, looking
for—and magnifying—little faults. Though the driving force behind your
actions is jealousy, you’re convinced it’s a logical choice. In the think-feel-
do principle, the sequence of this situation would look like this:

ILLUSTRATION 8.1—Mental/Emotional Pattern
In this situation, there is the added step of mental rationalization before
action, but the results are the same. Your rationalization has led you to
believe that you are coming from thought, when your actions really stem
from emotional reactions to the original negative thought—which you have
put out of your conscious awareness altogether.
Once we have an emotional response to a negative thought, we can do
one of three things. First, we can act on that negative emotion, which will
only compound the condition and create more destructive energy. Second,
we can restrain ourselves, which shows control and discipline. This is
better, but the negative energy will still be inside us, waiting to come out in
other ways. Or third, we transmute our thoughts and feelings. No matter
what the emotional reaction, we can always intervene with our thoughts and
turn that reaction around. We can always “count to ten” and “turn the other
cheek” to avoid acting rashly. Unfortunately, the majority of people
automatically go with the first option and act on their negative emotions
with little or no thought.
Negative emotions are deceptive. It’s easy to feel justified in our
negative feelings. If someone does us wrong, we feel justified in becoming
angry or hateful. And herein lies the trap: as spiritual students on the path,
we must train ourselves not to react with our lower emotions when wrongs
have been done to us. Do your best to redirect that instinctual urge,
matching wrong for wrong, blow for blow, eye for eye. “Two wrongs do not
make a right.” Whether we are “right” or not, what are we doing when we

react to that negative energy? We’re tying in to the very situation that
created that energy—which can only generate more negative energy. The
result is that we’re dragged down into the mud with the person who “started
it.” As humans, of course, we’re going to have a reaction. It’s unavoidable.
The idea is to learn to react constructively. Then we will have become the
masters rather than victims of our own emotions.
Spiritual Energy and Emotions
When you’re unbalanced in your emotional center, you’ll feel it most in
your abdominal area. It could feel like a stomach ache or nausea.
Expressions like “sick to my stomach,” “tearing my guts out,” and “ripping
me up” refer to feeling the emotional centers moving counterclockwise.
As with thoughts, the first energy to call on is the orange-red flame.
This spiritual energy can reach deep into the emotions and cut through all
emotional entanglements. If you find you’re an overly emotional person to
begin with, this energy can help to release the negative emotions that may
have accumulated. The following meditation is for general purification of
your entire emotional nature.
Meditative Prayer for Emotional Cleansing
“Down-ray the orange-red flame to my emotional body, cutting me loose
from all destructive emotions, disturbances, confusions, false sympathies,
and bombardments. I ask that all these black and gray atoms be taken into
the mineral kingdom and dissolved in the light.”
Feel that spiritual energy reaching into the core of your emotional
nature and out-raying through your entire emotional division, cutting loose
all negative emotions. Working in this center can feel like taming wild
horses. If you are asking for a specific emotion to be released, name that
emotion and see it being dissolved in the light. If any other emotion pops up
that you want to release, name that emotion and ask the light to release it

from you. As with work on the emotional center, let this light touch into
your other centers as well, purifying all interconnecting destructive links.
Before going on to the blue-white fire, let’s look more closely at some
destructive emotional energies.
Emotional Disturbances
A disturbance is a counterclockwise movement within the emotional center
that is usually caused by an upsetting situation. There’s a problem at home
that doesn’t go away and you carry the disturbance wherever you go.
Someone may have made a cruel comment that disturbed you. It’s
sometimes hard to trace where the disturbance came from, or what kind of
emotion it is exactly. Yet you know it’s there and that it’s interfering with
your normal activity.
Emotional Confusion
Emotional confusion comes about when two or more emotions are vying for
attention. Love-hate relationships are an example of emotional confusion.
Like mental confusion, emotional confusion tends to cause indecision and
paralysis because you don’t know where to go with your feelings.
False Sympathies
It’s so easy to tie into the emotional energies of people around you. This can
wreak havoc on your emotional body as well as your entire being. You can
work hard to keep your aura clean and high, then mess it up by opening to
outside influences. Although the entire auric field may be vulnerable to
outside influence, the emotional division can be especially so through false
sympathies. For example, you can be feeling peaceful, but if an agitated
person comes near you, you pick up that agitation if you are open to it. This
can happen especially when close to someone, like a spouse, parents, or
children. If you have a sympathetic tie with someone, you will relate to that
person emotionally. If that person feels sad, you will feel sad. If that person

feels happy, so will you. This transference can happen quickly because, in
this case, there’s little thinking involved.
Emotional Bombardments
Like false sympathy, bombardments involve taking in outside emotional
energy that has nothing to do with you. Whereas false sympathy deals more
with people you care about, bombardments may come from any source.
There are so many emotional currents in the world you can unintentionally
connect with. Bombardments can also be intentional—negative emotional
energies directed specifically at you. If someone dislikes or hates you for
any reason, that person will be transmitting an emotional current to you.
You can easily pick up this energy if you’re not paying attention, and
absorb and aggravate the whole condition. By cutting loose these emotional
bombardments, you steer clear of muddy waters.
Once you have finished your emotional cleansing, you are ready for the
blue-white fire. Chances are, your emotional body will drink in this energy
with gusto. Really feel it recharging all your emotions and replenishing all
depleted areas, bringing them into a more vibrant place—especially if you
are feeling emotionally exhausted.
Meditative Prayer for Emotional Replenishment
“Down-ray the blue-white fire of eternal life to charge and recharge my
emotional body, filling it with new life force so that my feelings and actions
are in a positive, creative place.”
Give yourself all the time you need to replenish yourself with the
bluewhite fire. Feel it out-raying throughout your entire solar plexus area
and drawing in new spiritual power. Also let it flow into the other spiritual
centers. In addition to the blue-white fire, you will want to draw in pure
white light as well. The pure white light can help to bring the emotions into
the poise necessary to sustain positive, creative emotions. Use the following

meditative prayer to help transmute any hidden traces of dark light not
cleansed with the orange-red flame.
Meditative Prayer for Emotional Upliftment with the Pure White Light
“Down-ray the pure white light into my emotional body to steady all the
feeling levels of my consciousness, bringing them into perfect poise and
alignment.”
Sometimes an emotional reaction can catch you off guard. You get
sudden bad news and you’re thrown completely for a loop, which throws
off your emotional body as well. If you can bring in the spiritual light right
then and there, you can save yourself a lot of grief later on. You’ll handle
the situation much better, especially if you have to make an important
decision and need a cool head. In this situation, you want the purple ray to
still your emotions. The following meditations are for emergency situations.
If you can get to a quiet place for your meditation, great. But if you can’t,
simply close your eyes and just visualize that soothing purple ray right
where you are.
Meditative Prayer to Still the Emotions
“Down-ray the deep purple ray to bring forth peace and serenity, quieting
my emotional body.”
If the negative emotion has had enough time to gather momentum, ask
to receive the emerald green ray as well, to balance things out.
Meditative Prayer to Balance the Emotions

“Down-ray the emerald green ray to bring forth Thy balance into my entire
emotional body, and move this emotional center clockwise.”


CHAPTER 9
TEN TRANSFORMATIONAL MEDITATIONS
THERE WILL BE MANY times when a general mental/emotional cleansing will
not be enough to turn a negative condition around. You may find yourself in
a specific destructive state of mind that resists your conscious efforts. In
these cases, you’ll need to target your meditations to focus the light on the
particular aspect of your mental or emotional nature that needs transmuting.
The beauty of targeted meditations is that they show how well the light can
be applied to the most intricate and demanding of situations.
In these challenging conditions, try to identify the thought that
originally started the negative momentum. Most of these conditions are a
result of seeing things with physical eyes rather than spiritual eyes. By
identifying the original misconception, you’re that much ahead of the game.
Both mental and emotional states are included in these meditations because
they’re so interconnected. However, if you notice the condition is more
emotional, then focus more light there, and vice versa. In all cases, ask the
light to touch into the four main centers and throughout your entire
consciousness, permeating your entire auric field.
For most mental and emotional conditions, you’ll start with the orange-
red flame and follow up with the blue-white fire. I’ve included slight
variations on these meditations to show how petitions to the light will vary
according to the specific need.
Please keep in mind that if any mental or emotional condition is severe
or chronic, you should seek professional help. Don’t try to remedy the
situation all on your own. Personal light work will help a great deal, but
when problems are intense, you will need the expertise of a doctor,
counselor, or skilled healer. Seeking help is an essential part of the spiritual
growth process when the situation calls for it.

Resentment
Resentment is strongly rooted in anger that is held in. Usually resentment is
directed at someone who is close to you, whether it’s a parent, spouse,
child, or friend. The feeling of being wronged often takes the form of hurt
that turns into anger, and then resentment.
Resentment is one of those tricky, stubborn, and self-justifying
emotions. You can say, “This person did this to me, and therefore I’m right
in feeling this way.” Now you’ve fallen into the emotional trap. All you
accomplish when you give way to resentment is to spawn a host of negative
reactions such as hurt, bitterness, anger, and revenge, which will only tear at
you and debilitate your aura. It takes energy to resent someone, energy that
could be used for constructive, life-enhancing purposes.
In the aura, resentment usually shows up as vitiated red and gray
energies in and around the emotional and Hermetic centers. These energies
have a distorted, menacing quality. They’re held in the Hermetic center,
because you’ve let them into your heart. The dirty red shows anger; it will
sometimes darken to a black if the resentment is very intense and veering
toward hatred. The gray appears because the energy is turned inward.
Resentful people don’t always express their feelings. In some cases,
depression can accompany that anger or hatred. Some of the spiritual
centers could be spinning counterclockwise, and if the resentment were to
persist it would show up in other parts of the energy field as well.
To break the spell that resentment puts on you, first evaluate the
situation. What really happened? Did that person really do this to you?
Many times, resentment can build around imagined slights or
misunderstandings. You may resent someone who got a promotion that you
feel you deserved, when, in actuality, he or she may be better qualified. You
must also make sure you have the full picture—that someone hasn’t told
you lies, or that you haven’t misinterpreted events. You can work with
spiritual illumination to reveal the truth, so that you’re coming from a place
of clarity.
However, let’s say someone has definitely offended you, and you resent
that person. The first energy you would bring down is the orange-red flame
to purify all the negative energy that came at you or was generated by you.

Meditative Prayer for Purifying Resentful Energies
“Down-ray the orange-red flame of purification to cut me loose from
resentment toward (name the person) and any negative energies coming at
me from (name the person). I hold to the knowing that this energy is being
released from me and is being dissolved in the light. I am now free of all
resentment and animosity.”
After you’ve called on the light, become very still and receptive to the
purification. See all the hurts, angers, hatreds—all the things that led up to
this moment—being cut loose from you. If you want to verbalize, let your
heart spill out your feelings, allowing this negative energy to be purified by
the orange-red flame and dissolved in the mineral kingdom. Whatever
images, words, impressions, or memories come up, let them all go into this
cathartic light. Try to make the release as vivid as you can. Feel divine
energy flowing freely, touching all the dark places created by this
resentment. Hold to the knowing that this energy is going through all the
centers and all aspects of your being, releasing every stickpin of resentment.
Give yourself a few minutes after you’ve finished to let any residual
energy be cleared out, and then follow up with the blue-white fire and the
following meditation.
Meditative Prayer for Spiritual Replenishment
“Down-ray the blue-white fire of eternal life to reestablish new life force at
every level of my being.”
Again, become still and feel the rush of this electrifying, life-giving
energy. Now you are coming into a complete restoration of your aura from
the ravages of energy-sapping resentment. Feel that new freshness entering
your consciousness, bringing zest and enthusiasm, motivation and desire.
Feel the restoring power of the blue-white fire going to every place touched
by the orange-red flame and bringing those areas up to the energy level

where they should be. You are beyond that dark thinking and feeling now.
That energy is no longer a part of you. Let the healing quality of this divine
life force restore your spiritual equilibrium and permeate every aspect of
your being. Feel it recharging you, giving you a new positive outlook on
life.
Once this work is done, you can follow up with any additional energy
you feel you need. Spiritually strengthened, you are now ready to begin
your forgiveness work (see Chapter 11). Depending on how open you are
and how deep the resentment, it may take several meditations for the light
to take hold. If the resentment is long-standing, you also have to work
strongly on the mind levels, because thought forms and patterns have had a
chance to set in. It will take more work on your part to cut them loose, but
the light work remains the same.
Once the situation has been placed in the light, you must decide what to
do. You may decide to confront that person from a place of love, and you
may be surprised by that person’s reaction. If you’re somehow unable to
meet, and/or that person is not responding to the light, then you have to let
the situation go, and ask that it be gently laid in God’s hands. If the person
who offended you isn’t around, or alive, then send the light to that soul
wherever it may be, and continue to practice forgiveness.
Hate
Hate is the lowest and most destructive of all emotions. No negative
emotion is good, but hate operates on the very lowest vibratory frequency.
It brings so much misery to all involved. In the aura, it presents itself in
inky blacks. A person in a hate energy field is capable of just about
anything, including murder. Like resentment, you hate something or
someone who has done something to you, imagined or actual. However,
unlike resentment, which can be understated and secretive, hate tends to
express itself. People in such a state are more willing to tell you they hate
you—unless they have a specific reason to hold back. If they don’t tell you,
they’ll tell other people. The one advantage to such outspoken behavior is
that you know where you stand with such a person. The bad thing is hatred
tends to want company. If you tell someone that you hate this or that, you’re
encouraging the other person to respond the same way. And since hate is

such a strong energy, the passion of your hatred can influence others, even
if they don’t feel that way.
Hatred is especially strong on a mass scale. Most of the world’s
atrocities can be traced back to hatred. Look at aggressive rulers and evil
dictators, and you’ll find hate as their motivating force for conquest. The
terrorist who is willing to kill others as well as himself mistakenly thinks he
is sacrificing to please God. Yet what actually makes him pull the trigger is
not love of God, but hatred for the misperceived person or idea that stands
in his way. The hateful person can also be methodical. An angry person
might do something impulsively and then it’s over, but the hateful person
can stew for a long time, giving ample opportunity for premeditated acts.
Hate operates void of divine essence. That’s why it’s so menacing. It’s
an active absorbing energy that, like a black hole, wants to draw things into
it. You can’t mess around with hatred. The same is true if hatred is directed
at you. It’s an aggressive energy that you must counteract with the highest
attributes of the Divine Light. In the aura, hate can take on different forms,
but the predominating energy is always black. Look at color Illustration 3.4
to see what hatred can look like. It is totally out of harmony with the divine
nature of life. And as we know, hatred can harbor cruel and sadistic
thoughts.
If hate is in your aura, you must make it a top priority to work on it.
With such an energy in your aura, it will be very hard for you to progress
spiritually. Hatred can be very difficult to let go of. As with resentment,
chances are, you are justifying your hatred. The wrongs committed are
usually extreme. I’m certainly not excusing the behavior of those who have
intentionally hurt you, but it’s your choice how to react. Hatred is
something you can control. You are choosing to hate.
Several steps are involved in clearing yourself of hatred. Once again,
start by calling upon the orange-red flame. You need this energy to come
down dynamically to cut loose the black energy in the aura.
Meditative Prayer for Purifying Hatred
“Down-ray the orange-red flame to strongly cut me loose from all hatred
directed at me from (name person), and release me from all hatred and

animosity anywhere in my consciousness that I have created and directed at
(name person). I ask that you take these black and gray energies into the
mineral kingdom to be dissolved in the light.”
You must be definite in calling in the orange-red flame, and then ready
to surrender these negative energies so they can be cut loose from your life.
Then become still and feel this power working in you. With intense
emotions such as hate, you will most likely have to repeat the exercise
several times to get the job done. With each meditation those dark energies
will gradually lighten until they finally disappear. You must be very careful
to not reenergize the hate by dwelling on it. Otherwise you will have to
repeat the work until you stabilize your consciousness.
After the orange-red flame, follow up with the blue-white fire, and feel
the blue-white fire lifting your consciousness.
Meditative Prayer for Spiritual Replenishment
“Down-ray the blue-white fire of eternal life to charge and recharge all
areas within me, bringing forth new life energy and lifting me into the
consciousness of Thy light.”
After the blue-white fire, do the forgiveness work presented in Chapter
11. You may also work with the deep rose pink ray of spiritual life to bring
in compassion and understanding.
If you have acted on your hate, it’s especially important to finish your
work using the pure white light. It will help to release any stickpins where
hatred may still be lodged and to defuse any negative momentum you may
have generated. It’s also an uplifting energy to help take you out of the hate
consciousness you’ve been living in.
Meditative Prayer for Upliftment with the Pure White Light

“Down-ray the pure white light to go into all levels of my being, lifting me
into the vibration of Thy holiness.”
Depending on your sensitivity to the light, you may feel relief during
this process as you shift out of the dark state you were in. You will also
begin to realize just how destructive that hatred was.
Anger
Anger is a common emotion that everyone has felt at one time or another.
Some people get angry quickly and forget their anger just as quickly. If
unchecked, anger can build and turn into rage. People with this type of
anger are like a bomb waiting to go off. They can blow up at the least
provocation. There’s an uncontrolled quality to anger. People don’t plan to
get angry, it just seems to happen sometimes against their will, and after the
outburst they feel bad. This shows poor control of the emotional nature.
Anger is an explosive energy in the aura. Color Illustration 3.5 shows
the firecracker-like energies of the vitiated reds and dark greens generated
by sustained outbursts of anger. As mentioned before, one strong outburst of
anger can linger two weeks in the aura. An angry person is hard to be
around. He or she is usually insensitive, irritable, and likely to say terrible
things, lashing out at people for no good reason. Many unpleasant
personality traits can come through with anger.
To clear yourself of anger, begin with the orange-red flame to start
clearing those streaks of vitiated red. See this energy bathing your entire
aura as well as your energy centers.
Meditative Prayer for Purifying Anger
“Down-ray the orange-red flame of purification into my entire being,
releasing me of all anger connected with (name person or situation) and
dissolving all negative energy in the light.”

Follow up with the blue-white fire.
Meditative Prayer for Spiritual Replenishment
“Down-ray the blue-white fire of eternal life to charge and recharge my
entire being, bringing me new life force and creative energy.”
In addition, you will need to work with the love ray to help bring you
into the consciousness of divine oneness and to release the irritations
associated with anger.
Meditative Prayer for Divine Love and Compassion
“Down-ray the deep rose pink of spiritual love, touching my entire being
and transforming anger into love so that I may have compassion. Let it flow
into all levels of my being, bringing me into Thy body of Divine Love.”
I also recommend bringing down the violet ray, which is a subtler
version of the purple ray. This ray is excellent for bringing in a gentle
peace. In anger, there is a harshness and agitation that the violet ray can
help smooth out.
Meditative Prayer for Gentle Peace
“Down-ray the violet ray of Thy peace into my entire being, releasing all
irritations and bringing me into a serenity and divine poise.”
There is something called righteous anger. You may express righteous
anger over an injustice done to someone who cannot speak for himself or
herself, or for unkindness being directed at you. Say someone is gossiping

about you, lying and hurting your reputation. You have a right to tell that
person, in no uncertain terms, to cease and desist. In this case, the emotion
is not an uncontrolled outburst but a definite controlled expression. No one
has the right to push into your aura, and you have every right to defend your
good name. Righteous anger is not the same kind of anger that we have
been speaking about. Righteous anger appears in the aura as bright red, not
dirty red. It is a positive energy. You’ll know the difference between the
two, because with righteous anger you won’t feel upset or displaced
afterward.
Jealousy
To be jealous is a sign of low self-worth. If you’re jealous, you believe that
someone has something you don’t—but should—have. This can create all
sorts of deceit and underhandedness as you go about trying to get the things
you want.
The spiritual understanding missing is that what you desire on the
outside is something you already possess within. If you find yourself
feeling jealous of someone’s talents or abilities, you must recognize that the
very same talent can unfold in you—if you desire it enough. Just because a
talent is active in someone else doesn’t mean it can’t be active in you. It’s
simply that the other has already worked at it, while you have yet to do so.
In life, there will always be those who are farther along the path than you
are, just as there are others who are not quite as far along. This is all part of
the natural evolutionary link that ties us all together, and it’s why you can
never compare yourself to others. If you do, “you may become vain or
bitter,” as the poem “Desiderata” warns. You will always be looking over
your shoulder at what the other guy is doing.
In the aura, jealousy presents itself as a dirty, avocado green energy. It’s
a very ugly color to see. It throws the aura off-kilter. There are often
splotches of brown and vitiated red, because with jealousy, meanness and
anger can be involved. If the jealousy is more like envy, then the shade will
be a lighter olive green.
Being jealous can destroy friendships. I remember two sisters who got
along very well together until they became interested in the same man. Both
were in their early twenties and only a year or two apart. The man was

interested in the older sister, who was prettier, and the younger one became
very jealous. She did everything she could to win the man’s affection, but it
just didn’t work. When she talked about her sister, I could see the avocado
green energy coming out of her emotional center. It was an ugly sight. Of
course, she had no idea what she was creating. Eventually the man married
the older sister. The younger sister, still seething with jealousy, couldn’t
take it and ended up moving away without resolving her feelings toward her
sister. These sisters lost their friendship, and their once-beautiful sisterhood,
to the “green-eyed monster,” jealousy.
Jealousy can be insidious. Begin with the orange-red flame and ask it to
cut you loose from all feelings of jealousy, wherever they may be lodged in
your consciousness.
Meditative Prayer for Purifying Jealousy
“Down-ray the orange-red flame to release me from all jealousy and envy
wherever they are lodged in my consciousness. Take all these black and
gray atoms to the mineral kingdom to be dissolved in the light.”
Feel it showering your entire being. If you feel it more in the emotions,
let the light stay there a little longer. If you’ve been talking about it a lot,
you might feel it strongly in the throat center. You might be surprised at
how much negative energy your jealousy can build. But don’t dwell on that.
Just feel the releasing. Afterward, come in with the blue-white fire to
recharge the areas depleted, asking to retain the power where you need it to
fortify your energy field.
Meditative Prayer for Spiritual Replenishment
“Down-ray the blue-white fire of eternal life to bring in new life force to all
levels of my being, and sustain its power wherever I need it.”

Then use the love ray to bring in more compassion for you and the
person you’ve been jealous of. Also ask for gentleness to come in with this
love, because chances are you were harsh in your handling of the situation.
Meditative Prayer for Emotional Upliftment with Divine Love
“Down-ray the deep rose pink of Divine Love to bring compassion into my
entire being and to bring me into a consciousness of Divine Love.”
To crown your efforts, finish up with the emerald green ray to bring you
into a harmonious state and to balance your aura. Ask that this ray bring in
serenity with the harmony. If you feel you also need to bring down the
peace ray to really establish that tranquility, then do so.
Meditative Prayer for Balance
“Down-ray the emerald green ray to harmonize and balance all levels of my
being.”
After you have finished your light work, make an effort to remove your
attention from the object of your jealousy until that negative energy is
completely out of your consciousness. If there’s been active friction, you
may want to get the issue out into the open. If it was jealousy over someone
else’s abilities, for example, pay a genuine compliment about that person’s
talent. Confess to your feelings and ask forgiveness. The person may
surprise you and turn out to be your friend. Remember, the divine spark
shines in everyone. Admiring the God spark in others is a holy trait. Mother
Teresa saw Christ in everyone she met. How can you be envious of Christ?
You can also work with divine guidance to help create the things you
want. If that quality, object, or situation you coveted is still a strong desire,
then you begin the building process for yourself. If it turns out you don’t
want it as much as you thought, then you will know it wasn’t that important

to begin with. And if it is something that is meant to be part of your life,
then you will be able to pursue it more effectively.
Depression
Depression is a complex problem. It is usually due to taking in too much of
the conditions around you. Even if you’re watching yourself, it’s hard not to
absorb the outside world to some degree. Strong disappointments, sudden
loss, and unresolved traumas can easily bring on depression. Physiological
conditions can also bring on depression.
A spiritual principle often overlooked in depression is that events or
conditions in your life are never permanent: “This too shall pass.” When in
a depressed state, you’re not seeing the full spiritual picture. The negativity
that seems to be engulfing you is a created condition that is temporary. In
your true spiritual essence, these states do not exist, and therefore are not
part of the originating reality. In God’s kingdom, all is in its perfect flow,
and since you are part of that perfection, part of you is in that perfect flow
right now.
Unfortunately, depression is one of those conditions you can become
strangely comfortable with, which can lead to many destructive habits.
Alcoholics usually have depression as a motivating force that drives them to
drink. Some people seem to love looking at the world fatalistically or
cynically. Yet, having a fatalistic or pessimistic view will only serve to
cloud the spiritual reality of life and make it easy to slip into depression.
The negativities you harbor stay with you only as long as you choose to
keep them.
Granted, sometimes you may feel that you don’t have the spiritual
power to rise out of your present condition. This is where the spiritual work
really comes to your assistance. The Divine Light will give you that
“booster shot” to help you reconnect with your source, so you can see
things in their true perspective. In addition, you now know that by
connecting with your Higher Self, you’re tapping into the higher spiritual
awareness that is above the discords of Earth life. By stepping into that
greater consciousness, you’re letting go of your problems and putting them
into God’s hands. He will steer you over all the bumps and roadblocks
along your spiritual path, and release the heaviness from your heart.

In the aura, depression most often shows itself as a gray cloud above the
head. If the depression is severe, it can appear as a gray energy circling the
entire person. Depression shows a lot in the Hermetic and emotional centers
because of its connection to disturbing events and the emotional response to
those events.
You must first cut loose these clouds with the orange-red flame. Like
most of the work you will be doing in this section, it may take several tries
before the gray clouds begin to dissipate, especially if the depression is
long-standing.
Meditative Prayer for Purifying Depression
“Down-ray the orange-red flame to cut loose any gray clouds of depression
and any negative energy, wherever it is lodged in my consciousness,
dissolving it in the mineral kingdom in the light.”
After the purification has done its job, follow up with the blue-white fire
—one of the most effective energies to use for depression. If you have time
to work with only one energy in connection with depression, use the blue-
white fire. Its uplifting power is truly dramatic.
Meditative Prayer for Spiritual Upliftment
“Down-ray the blue-white fire of eternal life to charge and recharge my
consciousness, lifting me out of any depressive energies and into Thy
renewing, electrifying, and everlasting life force.”
If there has been a lot of stress connected with your depression, you
may want to work with the purple ray as well. It will help you break away
from whatever it is that depresses you, almost as if you were going on an
island cruise and dropping away all your cares.

Meditative Prayer for Peace
“Down-ray the purple ray of divine peace, releasing me from the burdens
and pressures within my being and bringing forth Thy peace.”
Once you feel the light breaking up the depressive energy, you will start
to see things differently. If you can, take a little time off to give your psyche
a rest. Your body and nerves will recharge, and that will help the whole
process.
Depression can take time to be fully resolved; it’s hard to say how long
this process may take. The light will certainly begin the process of release
and upliftment right away. If the depression is not severe, the light can clear
it up within a relatively short time. But as with any condition that persists, if
the depression is severe or chronic, seek professional help as well, whether
it be from a doctor, psychiatrist, or healer.
At some point when you feel stronger, start to work on resolving any
condition that may have contributed to the depression to begin with. It
might involve letting go of something that’s bothering you or gathering the
courage to face something you’ve been avoiding. If there is more than one
thing going on at the same time, take each challenge one at a time. Use your
energy work with everything that comes up. Above all, cultivate a spiritual,
optimistic outlook.
Guilt
Guilt is directing anger or hostility toward yourself. Regret and remorse are
often cousins to guilt. The funny part about guilt is that it usually becomes a
form of self-punishment. By feeling guilt, you feel you’re atoning for some
wrong you have done.
In the aura, the basic color of guilt is gray. It can appear as a small gray
cloud above the head or around the heart center and emotional center as
well. Usually remorse is there, too, which will show up in tinges of darker,
charcoal gray. The gray will be mixed with the color of whatever wrong
was done. If you deceived someone, dark green will be mixed in with the
gray; if you were mean or cruel, cocoa brown will tell the story. So the

energy of guilt is rarely seen alone. This is what often helps to distinguish it
from the gray clouds of fear or depression.
Guilt can be expressed in strange ways. I once knew a woman who
owned a restaurant where I worked when I was very young. She had the
strange habit of leaving the cash register open, which of course enticed
customers and employees to take money from her, which they did. She
would also make large accounting errors in employees’ favor. It was as if
she were deliberately inviting people to steal from her. One time, she made
a thousand-dollar accounting error in my favor. I brought the matter to her
attention and instead of being surprised or grateful, she was indignant! I
could have just kept the money, but that’s a form of stealing and I wasn’t
going to get caught up in that. I thought, “This is it. I’m going to find out
what’s going on here.” I could see certain energies moving in her aura and
knew something was happening.
It took a little work, but finally she told me her story. When my
employer was a child, her mother had become hooked on morphine during a
hospital stay. After using up all their money to satisfy her addiction, she
would have her daughter steal. If they were visiting at a friend’s house, the
mother would be downstairs chatting while the little girl would sneak
upstairs, go into people’s bedrooms, and take what she could. Other times
her mother would have her crawl through windows at night or when no one
was home and take money. The guilt of what she did weighed heavily on
her, and she carried it into adulthood. When she found herself in a better
financial situation, her way of reciprocating was to allow people to steal
from her. It made her feel better and was her way of paying back the money
she’d taken.
Of course, if you make a mistake or hurt someone, there’s bound to be
regret and guilt. What you want to do as soon as you can is replace guilt
with compassion—both for the person wronged and for yourself. You can’t
control what you did in the past, but you have complete freedom to work on
things now. Forgive yourself for what you’ve done and certainly make
amends. Recognize that the soul part of you is still growing and not fully
perfected yet, so you will inevitably make mistakes. Sometimes you will
make big mistakes. That’s part of your life experience. What you want to do
is learn and grow from those mistakes, so you won’t repeat them. Begin
with the orange-red flame. Ask it to cut loose not only the gray energies of
guilt but also the negative energies that created the condition bringing about

the guilt. If the wrong you did was severe, divide this process. Work on
guilt separately as one purification, and then work on the negative situation.
Meditative Prayer for Releasing Guilt
“Down-ray the orange-red flame of purification to cut loose all thoughts
and feelings of guilt, wherever they are lodged in my consciousness, and
the accompanying destructive energies that created this guilt in the first
place.”
Follow up with the blue-white fire.
Meditative Prayer for Spiritual Replenishment
“Down-ray the blue-white fire to replenish all depleted areas of my
consciousness with new life force.”
Once you’ve revitalized yourself, you’ll want to bring in a strong flow
of the deep rose pink as a healing and uplifting love, so that you feel the
Divine Love. Remember: no matter what you’ve done, God forgives you,
because He always sees you in the highest possible light—as the divine
spark that you are. Regardless of any mistakes, God’s love is unshakable.
By working with this ray, you are opening up to that love flow. People often
feel they don’t deserve God’s love because of some of the things they’ve
done. Yet, Divine Love is always with us: it’s already a part of us. Many
people try to separate from that love and deny it to themselves. This only
serves to draw them further away from their spiritual objectives.
Meditative Prayer for Divine Love Upliftment

“Down-ray the deep rose pink ray as a healing love to bring me into the
oneness of Thy love, releasing any self-hate or anger and uplifting me as
one body in Thy body of Divine Love.”
Finish up your light work with the emerald green ray to help harmonize
your consciousness, especially if the guilt has been long-standing.
Meditative Prayer for Balance
“Down-ray the emerald green ray to balance and harmonize all the levels of
my consciousness— mind, body, and soul—with spirit.”
Once you’ve cleared your energy field, begin your forgiveness work
(see Chapter 11). Pray for yourself and the other person or persons
involved.
After the light work, it’s time to turn around whatever situation you
created. Look at it as objectively as you can and see what you can do to
make things right. If you cheated someone, pay him or her back. If you
were cruel to someone, apologize and show kindness. If you deceived
someone, come clean. Make every effort to take effective action. And if you
can’t help the person you harmed, find someone else or someone in a
similar situation and help that person.
Grief
It’s impossible to go through this life without suffering a loss that brings
grief. Everyone will lose someone or something dear to them at some point
and feel sorrow when that person or thing isn’t there anymore. After all, this
life is a visit. You and I are not meant to stay here forever. Yet, it’s easy to
forget this fundamental reality when we’re caught up in the activities of the
world. Although loss of loved ones can occasion the strongest form of grief,
people grieve over many things, including lost youth or ability, a bygone
time when life was especially idyllic, and so on.

Grief is one of the most heart-wrenching experiences you will ever have
to face. Anyone who has lost a child or a spouse will attest to that. And
because it is so difficult, so overwhelming, it also becomes one of the
greatest spiritual tests. Grief is an inevitable emotion; but when prolonged,
that’s a different story. I’ve lost many dear ones in my life and understand
grief very well. In love I tell you—excessive sorrow is selfish. When you
grieve in such a way, you’re grieving more for yourself than for the other
person. Should you be sad that the person you love is free from pain or old
age? Do you mourn when a caterpillar turns into a butterfly? Your loved
one has graduated from this existence and is free to go on to a greater
existence. This Earth life is not the only life there is. When you pass on
from Earth life, life does not end. You go on to the spiritual life from which
you came. This is why one of the greatest services you can do for a loved
one who has died is to let him or her go. Death cannot part you from your
loved one—you will meet up again in the spiritual realms.
Prolonged grief will hold you back because it keeps you in the past. And
if you’re in the past, you cannot be moving forward. Understandably, if
you’ve lost someone very dear to you, someone who’s been an important
part of your life, you’re going to feel great sadness. It’s only natural, and it’s
a good idea to give yourself time to mourn. There is a spiritual tradition that
allows forty-four days to mourn, and I highly recommend taking this time.
But after the mourning period, it’s wise to make every effort to move on.
Grief is another emotion that shows up as gray in the aura. I’ve seen it
as a gray bubble in the heart center and sometimes above the head as well.
If the person is angry with the person who died, there will be vitiated red in
the aura. Self-pity or depression would bring in a darker cloud of charcoal
gray and even black. The grieving soul might have unresolved issues
concerning the deceased, bringing up a lifetime of feelings and thoughts, all
of which will show up in the aura.
Begin with a thorough cleansing and replenishing, to lift you out of the
heavy vibrations that deep grief brings.
Meditative Prayer for Releasing Grief

“Down-ray the orange-red flame of purification to cut loose all feelings of
grief and loss everywhere in my consciousness, and dissolve all black and
gray atoms in the mineral kingdom in the light.”
Grief is another mental/emotional state that may be countered by a
strong recharging flow of the blue-white fire.
Meditative Prayer for Spiritual Replenishment
“Down-ray the blue-white fire to replenish all depleted areas of my
consciousness with new life force.”
You will also need a strong dose of the emerald green ray to bring you
back into harmony. With loss, your psyche will be thrown out of balance.
Your world may feel upside down. You’ll need the emerald green to bring
things back into perspective.
Meditative Prayer for Balance
“Down-ray the emerald green ray to balance and harmonize all the levels of
my consciousness as one body in Thy body of Divine Light and Love.”
Of course, you will want spiritual love. This will help to uplift your soul
and get you out of the loneliness you may feel. It also will help to
strengthen your compassion so you can see things more from the level of
Divine Love. Divine Love also brings in spiritual joy.
Meditative Prayer for Divine Love Upliftment

“Down-ray the deep rose pink ray as a healing love to bring me into the
oneness of Thy love, embracing me as one body in Thy body of Divine
Love.”
Perhaps the most helpful energy of all is the deep purple ray of spiritual
peace. If you have time to work with only one ray when in grief, use the
deep peace. When you lose someone, there is almost always shock
involved, and this ray can reach deep within to soothe and calm your soul.
There may also be impulses to act rashly; this ray can put you in a place of
serenity where you will see things more clearly.
Meditative Prayer for Peace
“Down-ray the purple ray of divine peace to all centers, especially my heart
center, to give rest to my soul and to touch into all aspects of my being,
releasing all grief and raising my consciousness into a state of harmony and
peace.”
After you have completed your light work, you’re ready to start using
the light in your life. After a grieving period, start filling your days with
fresh new thoughts and experiences. Surround yourself with positive,
supportive people. Reassert your connection with God. Feel joy for the
person who has passed on. Take care that you’re not isolating yourself too
much. There are as many ways of grieving as there are people. Some
bereaved people develop a desire to die themselves, in the erroneous belief
that it may bring them closer to the loved one who has passed on. Being
around people and having good friends always helps. If you have
unresolved issues with the person who passed on, be patient about that, too.
Just because he or she is no longer in the body doesn’t mean you can’t still
work things out within yourself.
Fear

Of all the negative emotions, fear is one of the strongest impediments to
reaching your spiritual goals. Fear can cut to the very core of your being
and paralyze you. Whereas hate can spur you on to negative action, fear
encourages no action at all. How can you progress and go after the life you
want if you’re afraid to take the initiative?
Fear reaches deep into the instinctual levels of your consciousness. Yet,
your fear doesn’t necessarily have to be a big fear. You can have small fears
that accumulate and even go unnoticed at first. But after a while, they add
up. You can fear something very real or have neurotic fears wherein an
innocuous situation sparks apprehension. If it persists, fear can breed
related emotions such as worry and depression. Worst of all, fear can breed
more fear.
To fear something, you have to see yourself as separate from your
divine source. Fear, by its very nature, creates a sense of separateness. In
fearing something, you’re accepting the belief that something or someone
has power over you and that you’re powerless to do anything about it. If
you return to your spiritual point of view, you can better see the fallacy in
this type of thinking. You are an essential part of the creative process of life.
How can there be any Power greater than that?
In the divine realm, you are part of the One. You are “under the shadow
of the Almighty.” There is no separateness in the divine world. There is only
one unifying, all-powerful source. This doesn’t mean that you don’t take
normal precautions; it does mean that you’re not coming from a place of
fear and trembling. To the degree that you’re in your divine oneness you
feel confident and courageous. You’ll face adversity with dynamic power
and courage. Look at the life of Saint Francis of Assisi, who tamed the wolf
and became his friend. Francis was a gentle man, yet he was able to save an
entire village from a vicious predator without any bloodshed. If he had been
afraid of what the wolf might do to him, what would have happened then?
You have to face your fears in order to conquer them. Most people will
do just about anything to avoid a condition or situation they fear. Never
allow fear to lodge in your being. It impairs your judgment, clouds your
reason, and constrains your very being.
You’re going to need a lot of spiritual power to get out of the fear state.
Begin by asking yourself: Is what I fear a real or imagined situation? Try to
identify the original experience or thought that created the fear. Once it’s
clear, you’ll know where to start.

Fear shows very clearly in the aura as a gray energy, mostly in the
emotional center. It can move in an odd, swirling motion from all the
emotional turbulence involved. When the fear is strong, I have seen a whole
band of it swirling around the aura itself. A very fearful person will also be
lacking in some of the uplifting and dynamic energies, such as gold, orange,
and red.
In working with the energies, bring down the orange-red flame and
blue-white fire to do a clearing and cleansing and to build up your aura. You
want the orange-red flame to touch into every thought, experience, and
sensation that’s producing the fear. The process may unloose some very
specific pictures that evoke the emotion. If so, ask that they be cleanly cut
away from your consciousness.
Meditative Prayer for Releasing Fear
“Down-ray the orange-red flame to cut loose all vibrations of fear wherever
those negative energies have taken control of my life, and dissolve these
black and gray atoms in the mineral kingdom, in the light.”
After you’re finished, bring in the blue-white fire.
Meditative Prayer for New Life Force
“Down-ray the blue-white fire to charge and recharge my consciousness
with this electrifying life force at all levels of my consciousness.”
Fearful experiences tend to pull you out of spiritual alignment quickly,
after which it’s hard to let any new energies take hold. Ask that the emerald
green ray touch into your centers and entire being, especially your
emotional body, bringing you into mind, body, and soul balance.
Meditative Prayer for Balance

“Down-ray the emerald green ray of balanced power to any areas of my
consciousness that were thrown out of alignment by fear, and bring me into
a divine centering and harmony at all levels of my consciousness.”
Now you have to build up the aura with the gold light. Gold will help
you to develop faith, courage, and strength. Bring in this ray very
deliberately to establish the dynamic light. It was your lack of faith that put
you in fear to begin with, but when you are in unity with God, you will feel
nothing resembling fear. You will be handling situations with a swift keen
hand and a sure step. The gold light will help you to reclaim that self-
confidence.
Meditative Prayer for Inner Strength
“Down-ray the golden ray of wisdom light to touch into all aspects of my
being, bringing me the inner strength, courage, confidence, divine faith, and
inner knowing to pull me through negative states of consciousness, so that I
am in dynamic oneness with Thee.”
Once you are in your spiritual power, use that energy. Face your fears
one by one—ideally as they come up. Acknowledge the God power and the
supreme power. Spiritual affirmations are of great assistance in restoring
confidence and courage (see Chapter 17). Use the gold as often as necessary
to reestablish that gold and the divine faith, and eventually you will conquer
your fears.
Worry
Worry and fear show up very similarly in the aura. The gray is the
dominating energy, but with worry the gray is lighter and not so oppressive.

If the worry is chronic, it might also show itself in the color division as gray
specks.
Some people are worrywarts. They feel that somehow it accomplishes
things, protects them, or prepares them for the unexpected. Of course it’s
important to be alert and prepared for the unexpected, but this can be
accomplished without worry. When you worry, you can exhaust yourself so
much that eventually you must relax, and in your relaxed state come your
answers.
When you worry, you’re expressing a lack of spiritual trust, a lack of
faith. If you are one with God, then you know for certain that God is
working things out for you. If you really have confidence in God, there can
be no worry. If you’re unsure about what to do in your life, you need to
consult your Higher Self to receive divine guidance (see Chapter 13). Be
patient for that guidance to come. You can do only so much on your own.
You are the channel through whom God works—which is all that’s expected
of you! We too often expect too much of ourselves and become stressed
when answers aren’t forthcoming. If you worry too much, you will block
the flow of light. If you really want resolution, stay quiet, and receive. Then
act.
Follow the same steps that dispel fear, outlined earlier, to clear your
aura of worry. Unless the worry is habitual, you don’t have to use the
emerald green ray.
Meditative Prayer for Purifying Worry
“Down-ray the orange-red flame to cut loose all patterns of worry and all
anxieties and irritations connected with worry, and dissolve these black and
gray atoms in the mineral kingdom, in the light.”
After you’re finished, bring in the blue-white fire.
Meditative Prayer for New Life Force

“Down-ray the blue-white fire to charge and recharge my consciousness
with electrifying life force at all levels of my being.”
Then you’ll want to work with the gold to increase your faith and
spiritual trust in God.
Meditative Prayer for Inner Strength
“Down-ray the golden ray of wisdom light to touch into all aspects of my
being, bringing me the inner strength and confidence, faith, and guidance to
direct my life so that I am in dynamic oneness with Thee.”
Then retrain yourself so that whenever conditions arise that call for you
to act and make decisions, those old patterns of worry don’t creep in. Once
you start to really establish your dynamic nature, a lot of your fears will
simply disappear.
Pride
It has been said that one of the first great sins committed by humankind was
inspired by pride. Throughout history, pride has been the cause of so much
strife, yet many people regard pride as a positive quality. They ask, “Why
not feel proud of an accomplishment well done? If I work very hard for
something, I should feel proud of what I did.” From a physical, human
point of view, this would seem to make sense, but a deeper look at the
spiritual root reveals the fundamental error in this thinking. Pride is an
overbearing feeling of self-accomplishment. The keyword here is “self ”
and it is in “self ” that you can be deceived. Of course you want to
acknowledge a job well done. It’s important to know your skills and talents.
This is not pride. Pride is when you acknowledge and congratulate yourself
as the creator of your achievements, and you put the emphasis solely on
you. This immediately moves you away from God consciousness and gives
you a sense of being independent and disconnected from your divine

source. You believe that the success is coming from your own efforts alone,
forgetting the wellspring from where your inspiration came. If you continue
along those lines, you will inevitably build the illusion of your superiority
over others, which can quickly lead to arrogance.
The spiritual truth missing in pride is humility—the understanding of
your relationship with God. Humility is your ability to see your rightful
place in the great cosmic plan. This relationship is not always easy to act
on. The grass always seems to be greener on the other side. Even Jesus’
disciples felt a sense of personal accomplishment when they felt their
spiritual powers over evil growing ever stronger. Jesus quickly rebuked
them, saying, “Rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather
rejoice, because your names are written in heaven” (Luke 10:20). In other
words, marvel that God has allowed you to be an instrument of spiritual
power, but do not claim this power as your own personal possession.
When you are in tune with the divine, many things will happen for you,
and if you’re not careful, you may start to claim these accomplishments as
your own, or even as your God-given rewards for being such a marvelous
person. This is a big test to see if you clearly understand the relationship
between you and your divine nature.
When you begin to recognize the spiritual root as the life-sustaining
power behind all your accomplishments, and give all credit and glory to
your divine source, then you have begun to overcome pride and master
humility.
Some people have a hard time accepting humility because they think of
being humble as a form of debasement or as an affront to their dignity. They
confuse being spiritually humble with being humiliated. This confusion is
understandable because of the way the word is most often used. Yet,
humility is just the opposite of debasement. Spiritual humility is seeing
yourself where you belong in the spiritual scheme of life—as an instrument
and co-creative being of God. If anything, true humility creates a greater
sense of worth, because you understand how precious you are in God’s
eyes.
The Greeks have a word for when pride gets the better of you. They call
it hybris, from which the Anglicized “hubris”(overbearing pride) is taken.
Everyone has felt hubris at some time or another.
Pride usually shows up in the aura as burnt orange and distorted
avocado green energies radiating from the emotional body in a jerky

motion. Begin your light work with the orange-red flame. You may feel a
little resistance to this energy, especially if your human ego has built up a
lot of pride in your talents and achievements, but stick with it.
Meditative Prayer to Purify Pride
“Down-ray the orange-red flame into all levels of my consciousness to cut
loose all insidious energies connected with pride, all feelings of arrogance,
or feelings that I’m better than someone else.”
As you follow up with the blue-white fire, feel how this divine power is
the very source of your life force.
Meditative Prayer for New Life Force
“Down-ray the blue-white fire of eternal life and recharge all levels of my
consciousness, breathing in the very life of God and helping me to
recognize Him as my true source of being.”
Once this is done, balance is important, because if you are acting under
the delusions of pride, you are out of rhythm with the spiritual pulse. The
emerald green can help you get back into harmony with the God flow.
Meditative Prayer for Spiritual Balance
“Down-ray the emerald green ray of spiritual balance to touch into all levels
of my being, balancing all conditions in divine order and harmony.”
Along with the harmonious green ray, you will need to work with the
white light to bring you back into a spiritual understanding of your

relationship with God. You can also work with the gold light if you feel
resistance and need more dynamic power to establish this consciousness in
you.
Meditative Prayer for Spiritual Awareness
“Down-ray the pure white light to touch into all levels of my consciousness
and to cut loose all unnaturalness and all pretenses so that I may come into
a spiritual inner knowing of my true relationship with God.”
I would finish this work with the deep rose pink ray to bring in more
spiritual humility through its gentle and compassionate flow. When you are
very proud, you cut yourself off from others, putting yourself in a special
category, so you’ll need to bring yourself back into unity and oneness with
God and others.
Meditative Prayer for Spiritual Humility
“Down-ray the deep rose pink ray of spiritual love, bringing in more
compassion and understanding for others, releasing all feelings of arrogance
or superiority, and establishing spiritual humility at all levels of my being.”
In applying the light work, start by giving God the glory and thanking
the divine for allowing you to be a channel of all good that is in your life. If
you are having great successes, give credit to God. Look for all the ways in
which you were inspired to follow the course you are on. If you are facing
failure or difficulties, watch that hurt pride isn’t getting the better of you.
Affirmations are a great help. They can keep your mind focused on your
spiritual priorities.
Pride is not easy to release. You may even have a hard time recognizing
it as something that needs to be worked on. You have to stay on top of this
very subtle enemy and strive to develop a more humble attitude. This is not

easy. Ben Franklin put it best when he said, “Even if I could conceive that I
had completely overcome it, I should probably be proud of my humility.”


CHAPTER 10
IMPROVING PERSONAL AFFAIRS
IN THE GRAND SCHEME of our evolution, Earth is a schoolhouse for spiritual
learning. We are students here to learn the lessons this schoolhouse
provides. Behind our day-to-day affairs and dealings with each other lies
the true purpose of these interactions—our spiritual growth. Earth then is
the testing ground of our spiritual mettle; it’s the divine laboratory where
we develop and unfold our soul’s potential. With such a mission, every
action takes on divine significance, however great or small it may be. It’s in
our daily affairs that you put the tools of spiritual light to work. Divine
Light is the key to success in all earthly endeavors. To create any condition
in your life, you must have the energy for it already present in your aura.
And if it isn’t there, you must generate the spiritual power so that it
becomes a part of you.
I have worked with some very famous and successful people in my life,
and have always found it clear from looking at their auras that their success
was no accident. Their talents were already a part of them—already in their
aura. So, it was no freak of nature that Mozart was a master musician or that
Leonardo da Vinci was able to paint the Mona Lisa. In the same way, it
wasn’t the apple that fell on Newton’s head that gave him the concept of
gravity. The accomplishments of great men and women down through the
ages were born of spiritual power, and the passion to use that power for the
greater good.
In the aura, the nucleus of all your relationships and personal world
affairs is the Hermetic center. This center is responsible for directing
spiritual energies that power your outside activities. All of your worldly
conditions are reflected in some way in this center. This means that the
energies of your relationships, your job, your finances, and your personal

and spiritual life all converge at this point. In this energetic flow, you’re the
center of your world—not the world, but your own world.
The Hermetic center is your manifestation center. It is through this
chakra that you project the spiritual energy to objectify what you have in
your heart and mind. To handle the activities of life, the Hermetic center has
twelve built-in power rays, representing the twelve avenues of your world
affairs. This tells us that the affairs of our life involve many facets. There is
an art to living; and learning to balance all departments of life is the key to
spiritual success. Too many times we focus on one part of our lives to the
detriment of other parts of our lives. Balance is the key to living and to the
Hermetic center. This is why the nucleus of the Hermetic center is emerald
green. This is the hub that regulates and steadies all departments of your
life.
Because the Hermetic center has so much to do, it can become burdened
to the point that you can feel overwhelmed and helpless. In this state, the
Hermetic center can become obscured by clouds of dark light, making it
hard to create. As with the other centers, you must work extra hard to keep
the Hermetic center moving in a positive flow even if there is turmoil
around you. You will not always have control over what’s happening in
your life, but you have total control over how you react to those conditions.
People often make the mistake of judging their lives in terms of what’s
happening to them, rather than by how they’re handling what’s happening
to them. If you’re facing a difficult situation with courage, fortitude, and
humility, you’re brightening your aura and will be strengthening the
Hermetic center.
The Hermetic center is the seat of the soul. It’s here that the soul
registers and absorbs all of life’s experiences and lessons to grow and
mature. So the first step in strengthening this center is to stay in your own
divine harmony and rhythm, and not take on the world’s woes. Of course,
don’t ignore the outside world. You need to be an active participant in life if
the soul is to grow, but don’t claim world conditions as your own. If you’re
of the world, you’re going to do what the world requires, and your primary
allegiance will be to the world. Your first allegiance must be to God. We
live with one another, but it is God who sustains us, and God to whom we
shall one day return.
It’s very easy to put trust in each other first, because we’re so close to
one another. For example, it’s very easy for you to look at your boss as the

source of your income. If you offend that person, you could lose your job,
and therefore your income. You might wonder, “Where does God fit into
this picture?” From the spiritual point of view, your employer is the
instrument through whom God’s prosperity is made manifest to you.
There’s a big difference between being the instrument and the source of
something. If you see God as your source and your boss as the instrument,
your focus changes. You respect your boss, but know that if this channel
were taken away for any reason, your spiritual supply would still be there. It
would find another channel of expression. So your approach to life is
strongly reflected in your heart chakra.
The key to a harmonious Hermetic center is to make sure it is spinning
clockwise. You want all your centers to be moving clockwise, but this is
especially true of the Hermetic center. If you’re not sure what clockwise is
in relation to your Hermetic center, review Step 3 of the Higher Self
meditation (see Chapter 5). If this center is spinning counterclockwise,
something is “off” in the way you are handling a situation or condition.
Maybe there is an urgent problem that needs your attention, and instead of
dealing with it you are running away. Maybe you are pursuing something
for the wrong reasons and are stubborn to correct that mistake. And if one
aspect of your life is off, that counterclockwise momentum can extend to
other aspects as well. For example, your career may be going great, but if
you’re having troubles at home and those troubles are not resolved,
eventually they can affect your work life.
When this center is moving clockwise, the rays of light move out in
beautiful flows. Depending on the development of the individual, energetic
radiations can extend well beyond the body. When the center is moving
counterclockwise, the light doesn’t radiate nearly so far. It’s more restricted
and generally looks jumbled. And there will be darker hues of color as well.
If you’re facing life’s challenges, even if they are not yet resolved, your
Hermetic center will rotate clockwise, but you have to be really working on
your problems! You can’t just sit on the fence and hope that things will
somehow work out. If you have a problem, resolve that problem or be
earnestly working toward resolution to keep this center moving clockwise.
This is God’s way of keeping you involved and active. Otherwise, you
might be tempted to sit and do nothing, mistakenly thinking your
meditations and prayers alone can do it all. In my counseling work, when
someone comes to me with a problem and I see the Hermetic center

spinning clockwise, I know that this person is doing his or her best to
handle the situation. Most likely things will work out, regardless of present
appearances. However, if this center is spinning counterclockwise, it means
not only is there a challenging situation going on, but the person is not
handling the situation properly. There’s something he or she is not doing or
is doing incorrectly that is generating the counterclockwise motion. This
means there is something urgent that the person must do to remedy the
situation.
To start building up more power in this center, begin with a cleansing to
cut loose the tangled energies that can disrupt your spiritual flow and throw
apparent obstacles in your path. The light will help to harmonize and
organize your many activities.
Meditative Prayer for Purifying the Hermetic Center
“Down-ray the orange-red flame of purification into my Hermetic center to
cleanse all my comings, goings, and doings; touch into persons, places,
things, conditions, situations, and the conditions that constitute situations,
releasing me from all destructive energies and obstacles in my path.
Dissolve all these black and gray atoms in the mineral kingdom, in the
light.”
This is a very effective meditative prayer that covers a wide range of
activities. It is recommended that you memorize this prayer, as the wording
is common to many applications of the light in this center. You can add any
specific situation to your prayer that you feel needs purification. Upon
finishing, bring in the blue-white fire. Feel the life force touching into all
areas of your world affairs, drawing in new, divine energy to give you a
fresh outlook on life.
Meditative Prayer to Replenish the Hermetic Center

“Down-ray the blue-white fire of eternal life to charge and recharge all
twelve avenues of my human Earth affairs, establishing new life force and
creative energy in all aspects of my activities.”
The emerald green ray is one of the most essential rays you can use in
this center. Even though emerald green is already part of this point, you will
be using this energy a great deal to keep all your activities in balance. This
power can help you stay steady, especially if something suddenly pops up
that throws your life off-kilter.
Meditative Prayer to Balance the Hermetic Center
“Down-ray the emerald green ray to balance all twelve avenues of my
human Earth affairs, establishing divine harmony and rhythm in all of my
activities.”
In addition to the emerald green ray, I recommend using the white light
to uplift and bring in the holy vibration to this center, as you can feel
disconnected as a result of so much earthly activity.
Meditative Prayer to Uplift the Hermetic Center
“Down-ray the pure white light to bring forth Thy divine radiance in every
avenue of my world affairs, spiritually uplifting me into Thy divine
consciousness and activity.”
Because this center is so active, it is easy for stress to build, especially if
sudden or unexpected things happen. In these situations, bring in the deep
purple energy to still your consciousness. Even if you haven’t the time to
call down any other ray, bringing in the peace ray will help soften the shock
element so that you can think more clearly.

Meditative Prayer to Quiet the Hermetic Center
“Down-ray the deep purple ray of spiritual peace to touch deep into my
heart levels, stilling any stress and shock and bringing me into the silence of
peace and the peace of silence.”
Building Prosperity
We go through the greater part of our lives earning, saving, and spending
money. Money facilitates so many of our daily activities that it seems like a
basic operating principle of life. Although money does indeed occupy a
central place, many of us understand little of its spiritual operation. It’s no
wonder that we often have problems with finances in one form or another.
To understand how to work with spiritual energy to build both supply
and a consciousness of supply, we’ll need to look at the basic spiritual
principles of abundance. Prosperity, by the way, is not limited to finances.
We can enjoy a wealth of ideas, rich friendships, and abundance in just
about every avenue of expression, but here we’ll focus on prosperity as it
relates to finances and money supply.
Where You Stand Is Your Prosperity
This is the first principle of supply. It means that all the prosperity you’ll
ever need is already with you. And since it’s with you, you don’t need to
look outside yourself to generate prosperity. Prosperity is with you even if
it’s not yet manifest in your outer world.
Following the spiritual point of view that all physical manifestations are
the result of inner, spiritual causes, it follows that all physical expressions
of wealth result from an inner spiritual root of prosperity. As with
everything in life, wealth and supply originate in the spiritual realms. By
touching into your spiritual source, you’re touching into the divine source
of all supply. This places you in the midst of an unending fountain of
supply. This supply can materialize in a variety of ways, but regardless of
the channel of expression, be it a person or a job, the true connection to

your prosperity is always the divine within you. If you look to the outside
world for your fortune, your success will be hit or miss.
To activate this spiritual power of abundance, God gave you a special
power ray. One of the twelve power rays of your Hermetic center and your
human Earth affairs is the turquoise ray of supply. It’s your own special
connection to the divine reservoir of spiritual wealth. This power ray gives
the jump-start you need to move the prosperity principles into action.
Without this ray, it would be hard to draw on spiritual power to create what
you need. This turquoise ray is with you always, whether you use it or not.
You could be dying of starvation or be homeless, and this ray would still be
with you. Again, it’s a matter of using or not using the power that’s already
there. When I was a little girl living in Minot, North Dakota, there was a
woman who walked around town like a beggar, scraping for money. It
turned out she had a mattress full of cash at home. In our own way, this too
often happens. Though blessed with the potential for unlimited power and
wealth, we often choose to live as if we were paupers.
How you handle prosperity is one of life’s greatest challenges and
opportunities. Money is a form of energy. It represents your Earth power,
and by mastering the art of Earth power, you are showing your capacity to
handle one of life’s most essential divine powers. The principles of
prosperity exist at every realm of life. It expresses itself even more
wondrously in the higher planes of existence. In these higher dimensions,
prosperity can manifest through the power of mind and divine will. In order
to develop this kind of consciousness, develop your power of prosperity
here and now by mastering the conditions that now face you.
What does it mean to master the lessons of prosperity? Does it mean
accumulating a great sum of money, becoming a king or one of the
wealthiest persons on Earth? Certainly these things can and do happen. Yet
the real goal of mastering prosperity is to reach the point where you know
your supply is there for you whenever you need it. This knowing is not an
idle affirmation that can waver at the first sign of adversity, but a steadfast
inner knowing. When you are steadfast in that divine knowing, you can
manifest what you need, when you need it. However, the demonstration of
that divine knowing won’t always assume the form of great wealth. It will
take the form of expression that best serves the divine purpose.
Becoming the richest man or woman on Earth doesn’t mean you have
mastered the art of prosperity. A surprising number of extremely wealthy

people live in a constant state of fear that their money isn’t enough or that it
will be taken away from them somehow. This is not a demonstration of the
divine consciousness of wealth. When you are in your true wealth, it won’t
matter how much you have, because you will be in direct connection with
the very source of abundance.
Give to Receive
This second great principle is best expressed in the adage “The more you
give, the more you receive.” Notice the word more. The more you give, the
more you receive. Not the same you receive, commensurate with your
giving, but the more you receive! The spiritual principles of prosperity
dictate that if you give a dollar, two dollars, in some form, will come back
to you. When you send the energy out initially, not only do you create the
conditions for its return, you create the conditions for its return multiplied.
This is one of the great laws of the universe and may be seen operating at
every level of life. By lending a hand, in some way you will be offered two
hands to help you when you need them. This principle of spiritual
multiplication is part of the ascension principle in your spiritual evolution
and light work. As you climb the ladder of life, not only does your light
expand, it expands exponentially.
Most people have trained themselves to think in reverse. They try to
collect as much as they can. They hoard money and then give it out with
great reluctance. There may be fear connected with money. When money
gets short, what do you tend to do? You hold your money back, right? The
tendency is to withdraw out of fear of losing what little you have. But this
has the opposite effect of what you want. By holding so tightly, you’re
actually “strangling” your consciousness of supply and ensuring less for
yourself. Now, I’m not saying to spend money recklessly. If funds appear
low, sure, you might have to cut back on expenses, but you must still keep
the principle of giving very much alive.
Start by being generous. Open your heart. If someone asks for help, give
it. Don’t judge that person’s merit, or do it begrudgingly. Give with your
heart. The gift without the giver is bare.
You Are the Steward of God’s Supply

This principle is most often overlooked. It simply states that you are the
channel—and not the owner—of God’s abundance and supply. Most people
like to think in terms of things being theirs. They live in their own houses,
drive their own cars, and have their own bank accounts, their own families,
and so on. In truth, they are the stewards of all these things. There’s nothing
in this world that belongs to you. All that you appear to possess is a result of
a spiritual root that was alive long before it showed up in your life. It’s by
your alignment with the spiritual laws of life that you enjoy your things and
circumstances.
This knowledge can relieve you of much stress in relation to money.
First, it takes some of the responsibility off your shoulders. As long as
you’re following the laws of supply, you can leave the rest to God. Did not
the Christ say, “Take therefore no thought for the morrow” (Matt. 6:34)? Or,
as it has been metaphysically interpreted, “Take no anxious thought for the
morrow.” Being a steward of money rather than its owner releases you of
possessiveness. It makes you aware that, as a steward, some of your money
is obviously meant to go to others. It was brought into your life for just that
purpose. Many times that’s how God can reach those people—through you.
Poverty Consciousness
Before getting into the meditative work, let’s look at familiar behavior that
stops us from being in this confident awareness of wealth. It is
characterized by two words—poverty consciousness.
Poverty consciousness is the mental conditioning wherein we accept a
negative, physical perception of a seeming lack as real. Poverty
consciousness is so pervasive and automatic that we don’t realize how often
we actually talk ourselves out of abundance. For example, if your bank
account has a balance of two dollars, it would be natural for you to say you
have no money. This negative affirmation would then begin a chain
reaction, because you’ve accepted this condition as real, when in truth, you
are seeing things as they physically appear and not as they are spiritually.
Regardless of your physical situation, spiritually your wealth is unlimited
and unchanged. The only reason you’re experiencing a sense of lack is that
somewhere there has been a disruption in your spiritual connection that you

now must correct. Once that connection is reestablished, the condition will
work itself out.
When you are in poverty consciousness, you’ll feel like there’s never
enough money. You’ll be thinking in terms of how limited your funds are,
that you don’t have enough to do the things you want. And you will think
all these conditions are permanent, or next to impossible to change. Maybe
the bills are stacking up with no apparent money to pay them. Maybe your
clothes are getting old or your home needs repairs or your car is on its last
legs. These are strong images, and if they’re around you all the time, it’s
easy for you to let them make a deep impression on you. Poverty
consciousness, by the way, is not limited to “poor” people. Wealthy people
can entertain feelings of lack and limitation just as easily. These people may
be worth millions but still worry about money. There was a man who
founded a multimillion-dollar company, yet still lived in the simple house
he grew up in. He even kept the same rotary phones he had when he started
the business! Why didn’t he enjoy his wealth? Because he still saw himself
as the struggling young man with little money, even though he had long
passed that point. Proverbs 13:7 says it best: “There is that maketh himself
rich, yet hath nothing: there is that maketh himself poor, yet hath great
riches.”
This mental conditioning of poverty can come from a variety of sources.
It may be that you grew up in a family with little money and you came to
accept that as a normal fact of life. You may have associated with other
poverty thinkers who influenced and reinforced your thinking. Or it may
simply be your own mental tendency to think in terms of “never enough.”
There are many outside influences that encourage the consciousness of lack
and limitation.
When you accept poverty, you have poverty. It’s as simple as that. Be
alert and reject thoughts of poverty as soon as they come to your awareness.
Poverty consciousness, if allowed to grow, will have a paralyzing effect on
your life. It creates low self-esteem and a feeling of futility that will stop
you from going for the things you want in life. In addition, it creates a host
of other negative emotions, including anxiety, fear, worry, and desperation.
The longer you stay in such a consciousness, the more you will think that
the condition is permanent.
There is a famous story about two brothers, both born into poverty.
They were separated while still young. One went on to become a successful

businessman while the other continued to be plagued by financial troubles.
Now why did one brother rise above his situation while the other didn’t?
The brother who succeeded believed he could rise above his conditions,
while the brother who struggled accepted his poverty condition.
Poverty Being Holy
One of the false conceptions of how money works comes from a deeply
entrenched notion of poverty being holy. Many spiritually minded people
have adopted the idea that having money somehow inhibits their spiritual
growth and have thus chosen to do without money or earthly luxuries in
order to be spiritual. Many spiritual philosophies and anecdotes appear to
support this idea. There’s the familiar Bible misquote: “Money is the root of
all evil.” The actual words are, “Love of money is the root of all evil” (1
Tim. 6:10). It is not money itself. That is as much a part of the divine as
anything else. It is the attachment to money above all else that is the root of
so much unnecessary pain and suffering. Jesus spoke of how it was “easier
for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of God” (Matt. 19:24). There are even some religious
sects in India that believe having furniture is a sign of decadence and moral
corruption!
Metaphysically speaking, there is nothing inherently evil or wrong with
having money. Quite the opposite is true. Money is a form of energy like
everything else, and being in the flow of prosperity is sharing in God’s light
and power. If God is infinite wealth, why wouldn’t the divine want you, as
the beloved child, to partake of that holy wealth? You’re meant to partake of
all God’s blessings, and prosperity is one of those blessings.
Where the confusion sets in is when you worship money as an end in
itself. Worshipping money is an evil that will eventually bring spiritual
and/or financial bankruptcy. If you make a false god of money, you are sure
to have trouble. It’s not that a rich man cannot enter the kingdom of God,
but rather that a man who is attached to his possessions will not be able to
enter the divine kingdom until he learns to let go of material attachments. If
you worship possessions of any kind, it’s much harder for you to come into
your spiritual consciousness because your mind is focused on material
things. You need to reverse your priorities and direct your attention to the

spiritual life. Then your prosperity will flow, and it will be in balance with
other aspects of your life.
There’s a wonderful story about a young Indian boy who left home to
search for the guru who would teach him the mysteries of life. He looked in
many places but couldn’t find his spiritual teacher. One day, he had come to
a palace to ask for some water. As he was leaving, he heard a voice inside
the palace asking, “Where are you going, little boy?”
The boy looked inside and saw the owner of the palace coming out. He
looked like a raja and was dressed in the finest clothes and jewelry. “I
stopped for some water and must leave to find my guru,” was the boy’s
response.
“What makes you think you haven’t found him?”
The boy looked at the man in his fine raiment. “You? No, you can’t be
him. What do you know of spiritual things?”
“Why don’t you come in and stay for a while. If you don’t think I have
something to teach you, you can go on your way.”
The boy agreed, and the master of the house started teaching the boy
many things. The boy was impressed, but still could see only the man’s
wealth and couldn’t imagine how a man with so many material things could
be so spiritual.
One day, as the master was teaching, a servant ran into the room crying,
“The palace is on fire!”
The master didn’t move an inch and simply replied, “Don’t bother me;
I’m busy.”
A few moments later, the servant came up again yelling, “But, Master,
the fire is growing and coming up the stairs now!”
Again the master said, “Can’t you see that I’m busy? Please, leave me
alone.”
Finally, the servant came again, beseeching the master, “Master, the
fire’s coming down the hall! You must do something or the palace will be
lost!”
The man still did not move, but the boy, hearing such news, picked up
his books and started running for the door. Suddenly, the master said, “Aha!
I was willing to lose my whole palace and perhaps my life, and you were
worried about your three little books.”
So you are the one who passes judgment about what is spiritual and
what is not. Clearly, in this apocryphal story, the guru was not interested in

threatening the boy’s life or boasting of his own spiritual development. He
was using this situation to provoke the pupil to help him break the
illusionary picture the boy had regarding wealth and spirituality. This story
also demonstrates that not only can a misapprehension of prosperity block
the flow of prosperity, it can actually hinder spiritual development as well.
God is not interested in making you suffer. After all, the Creator knows
very well that you need material things. Even the great Buddha, when he
was searching for enlightenment, was said to have tried at one point to deny
himself every physical dependency and live on one grain of rice a day, only
to learn that this was not the way to enlightenment. This experience helped
him to choose instead what he termed “the middle way” to spiritual
maturity.
For every Mother Teresa who chooses to give up worldly possessions,
there is also a King Solomon who is both spiritual and wealthy. It all
depends on the soul’s particular lesson or mission.
Tapping the Turquoise Ray
In working with spiritual energy to build prosperity, you first want to clear
misconceptions from your mind because poverty consciousness starts on the
mental level. The orange-red flame is effective at clearing away these
invasive weeds. Again, include the four main centers in your spiritual
cleansing.
Meditative Prayer for Releasing Poverty Consciousness
“Down-ray the orange-red flame of purification to cut loose all sense of
lack and limitation, especially in my mental body, cleansing me of poverty
consciousness wherever it is lodged in my being.”
Feel those unenlightened thoughts dropping away from you. You will be
surprised at how much you’ve been holding on to that needs releasing. You
might find that you resist this process. Chances are, you’ve built a strong

image of whatever your condition is, and it’s not so easy to just let it go. In
this case, pace yourself. Follow this meditative sequence to the degree to
which you feel comfortable. Later on, you can repeat the entire process as
often as you feel the need.
After you finish using the orange-red flame, bring in the blue-white fire
to help establish new positive flows of Divine Light.
Meditative Prayer for Replenishing the Consciousness
“Down-ray the blue-white fire of eternal life to charge and recharge all
levels of my being, bringing me new life force.”
Once you have replenished yourself, you’re ready to build up your aura
with the turquoise ray. This is a marvelous energy, one you can never use
enough when building your prosperity. You may work with all the centers,
but there is special emphasis on the Hermetic center when working with
this energy. As you bring it down, you want to get into the feeling and
knowing of this divine flow of supply. Envision yourself as a mighty
monarch who can buy anything.
Meditative Prayer for Prosperity
“Down-ray the turquoise ray of abundance and supply into all levels of
consciousness, especially my Hermetic center, quickening all twelve
avenues of my world affairs, and establishing this Thy prosperity in my
human Earth affairs.”
Sense and feel the activation of this center. If you like, you can add a
short visualization to fully establish this energy in your aura. If you have
seven cents in your bank account, see seven hundred dollars in your bank
account. See this ray touching into your money supply and quickening in
this light. See all your sources of income receiving a quickening with this

spiritual flow. Ask that the light “multiply and increase this Thy money.”
And hold to the knowing that this is actually happening for you.
To finish your work, add the silver ray to quicken the turquoise and help
manifest prosperity faster.
Meditative Prayer for Quickening the Prosperity Flow
“Down-ray the silver ray of divine intelligence into my Hermetic center,
quickening this Thy prosperity. Guide me in the intelligent use and
application of Thy holy abundance.”
Once this power is established in you, give thanks, and trust that the
energy is in motion. Feel that power attracting the things you need. If you
find yourself falling back into worry patterns, repeat the light work. You can
do this three times in one day to get the energy moving and really make the
connection. Of course, you can complement this work with any other light
work you feel you need to strengthen this spiritual abundance.
Once you feel the energy is there for you, focus on the goals you want
to achieve, the things you want to create, knowing that financial resources
will be available as you need them. Visualizations are a great help at this
point to create the conditions you want (see Chapter 17).
Career
Most people probably spend more time at their jobs than any other single
pursuit. In many professions, the forty-hour week has turned into the fifty-,
sixty-, and even seventy-hour week. That’s a lot of time to be focusing on
any single activity. Because your career takes such a big chunk of your life,
you want to be sure the time you’re spending at it is time well spent.
Directing the light into your career can help build your dream job, create
harmony in the workplace, remove stumbling blocks, alleviate stress, and
keep moving your profession in the right direction.

The dictionary defines “career” as “a chosen pursuit.” It comes from an
old French word for racecourse. In staking your claim in the work world, a
career can certainly feel like running a race or, as some call it, a “rat race.”
The first thing to recognize when doing spiritual energy work is that your
career is not an identity; it’s an activity. It’s not you. You are a divine
spiritual being in the process of unfolding your spiritual powers. To do this,
part of your purpose is to express yourself in focused activities that
strengthen your abilities. That’s the spiritual purpose of a career. Your job is
an important part of your life, but you are not your job. If you identify with
what you do rather than who you are, you will always be at the mercy of
that activity. And there will inevitably come a day of reckoning, because no
pursuit can satisfy all your needs.
A common misunderstanding about a career is that it must be money
producing. A “chosen pursuit” can mean anything that you diligently focus
your attention on. It’s come to be associated with a chosen profession, but
any serious pursuit is a career. Motherhood, while not a revenue-generating
job, is one of the most sacred and important careers a person can undertake.
It’s unquestionably a career in the best sense of the word.
Your chosen pursuit is strongly connected with your purpose in life. If
Earth is a spiritual schoolhouse for the soul, then a career is one of the most
important “courses” you’ll be taking while attending this earthly school.
Like any other aspect of your human Earth affairs, your career is a spiritual
activity designed to help your soul grow. You may be here to develop your
creative side, in which case you’ll be attracted to artistic careers. Or it may
be that you need to develop your social skills, in which case you will
choose a profession where you’ll interact with a lot of people, such as in
business or the social sciences.
A positive attitude is an important prerequisite to pursuing a career.
There must be joy in work because work without joy is drudgery. Create joy
even if it’s not your ideal work. Of course you should strive with all your
heart for what you want, but in the course of reaching that goal, you may
have to do work that is less than ideal. So attitude is everything. When there
is love in what you do, it’s not work at all.
Many people do not have a good attitude toward their work. In focusing
the spiritual light on your career, cultivate a positive attitude about the work
you’re doing. From the spiritual point of view, no honest work is low or
base. All work is valid and worthy in God’s eyes. There is a story about

Saint Francis of Assisi being confronted about work ethics. Saint Francis
was sweeping a walkway to a church. It was a simple task, but he did it as if
it were of great importance. A person came up to him wondering why he
didn’t assign that menial job to one of the monks in his order. When the
man didn’t get the response he wanted from Saint Francis, he tried to
provoke him by asking what he’d do if he found out he was going to die in
an hour. Saint Francis calmly replied, “I’d finish sweeping.”
The way to maintain joy in your work life is to enjoy the process
without being attached to results. This is work for its own sake more than
for the rewards you may reap. This doesn’t mean you don’t pay attention
and strive to reach the career goals you’ve set. It simply means that you
don’t identify those goals as your primary motivation. You are not always in
control of how things turn out. If a job doesn’t work out the way you
envisioned, you might feel like a failure and believe that your time was
wasted. But if you put your heart into the process of work and recognized
that your spiritual growth was in the journey itself as much as in the
destination, then you’d know that no time was wasted at all. What appeared
to be failure would contribute to success in the next try. The Bhagavad Gita
puts it well: “To work alone thou hast the right, but never to the fruits
thereof.”
One of the twelve power rays in your Hermetic center is the ray of
career or purpose. It appears as pure white light. This ray quickens you to
help manifest your purpose in life. It helps in all facets of your work life,
such as position, advancement, finding a new job, etc. Without this ray you
might have the thought or desire to do something, but there would be very
little power to actually manifest those dreams. This ray works automatically
for you. Yet when you work with spiritual energy to strengthen the
Hermetic center you can greatly strengthen this career Hermetic ray. When
someone is at full throttle in his or her career, happy and productive, the
Hermetic center will be very bright. It will be moving in a strong clockwise
motion and show active emanations of gold, red, and orange energies
radiating from the center at least a foot in all directions. The white ray
within the Hermetic center will be very strong and pronounced.
Three Energetic Phases of Building a Career

In building your career, there are three distinct spiritual energy flows in the
aura connected to this process. They are:
1. Internal building.
2. Projecting spiritual energy.
3. Manifesting.
The first stage is building the skills to be good at your work. Whether
you are going to school, interning, or learning on the job, you need to build
the energy in your aura to be successful at what you wish to do. In my own
case, I was clairvoyant almost from birth, but it was only after many years
of gathering experience and study that I was a trained clairvoyant and ready
to teach metaphysics to others.
Depending on the type of career you are building or strengthening,
working with spiritual energy can greatly help, especially calling on
spiritual powers related to your type of profession. Remember, when you
are learning something new, there is a spiritual energy associated with that
activity. This power builds as you keep your attention on that pursuit. If you
are studying to be an artist, you are building the spiritual power rays
connected to creative activity. If you are pursuing the healing arts, you will
be developing different types of energies as you build your healing powers.
Once the spiritual power has built to a certain level and your skill set
has reached a certain competence, then it’s time to start moving that power
into your outer life. A new set of energies starts showing up in the aura for
this second stage. Maybe you have just finished school and now get your
first job in the “real world.” It may not be your ideal work, but it’s working
in the field you have studied in. In the aura, the energies that have been
gaining momentum in your aura now start projecting into your outer world.
Remember, your career is not an isolated pursuit. You pursue your career in
cooperation with other people. We are all playing our part in the divine plan
and our careers need to be in harmony with that plan. This is why when
putting anything to action you ask that it be done “according to divine law
and love for the good of all concerned.” It needs to be a winwin situation
for all involved. This doesn’t mean there isn’t some healthy competition
involved. But it does mean you are aiming to fulfill your part in the divine
scheme of life through productive collaboration.

In the aura, this projecting energy appears as rays of white light moving
out from the Hermetic center in every direction, 360 degrees. The rays can
extend quite far when strong, almost half of arm’s length. When a person is
emanating this power it means he or she is dedicating a lot of personal
power and motivation to succeed. You could see this type of energy in a
woman, for example, who has spent years in college developing business
skills and now is starting her work life and putting everything she has into
being productive in her job. Her first or even second job may not be her
dream job but she is applying herself diligently. She is putting herself into
what she does. In doing this, this person is projecting her Hermetic energy
into the vibrated ethers and this is working to attract her ideal work to her.
Like attracts like. As long as this person stays on track and does not become
discouraged to the point of changing direction or giving up, that energy will
eventually lead into the third stage—manifestation.
In this third stage of career building, life is now giving back what has
been given to it. The inner spiritual prompting is now projecting into outer
manifestation. Perhaps that person does get the job offer she’s been
dreaming of or the business she started is now taking off. The momentum
has built and although there may be more to do, the aspiring soul is now
seeing the results of her steadfast and sincere efforts.
This third phase can present itself in fascinating ways in the aura. The
gallery of auric portraits in Chapter 3 shows wonderful examples of
manifested success in the aura. Someone who builds great wealth can
develop a prosperity aura similar to the one in color Illustration 3.6. This
kind of prosperity energy can only be developed to this degree in the aura if
the power is manifest in life. The scientific equations seen in color
Illustration 3.3 would not be that extensive unless those equations were
producing something in outer life. Even the love energy seen in color
Illustration 3.2 would not be so strong unless the love were reciprocated.
When our inner spiritual efforts find expression in the outer world, that
energy reciprocates back to the aura blessing it.
Now, there are some people who do everything right when it comes to
their careers, yet, because of circumstances beyond their control, they do
not get to see the full fruit of their labors. What happens here? First, by
divine law, sooner or later, in this or another lifetime, good deeds find their
reciprocal flow. The “good karma” that has accrued must eventually find
expression. While it may not fully be able to reflect itself back into the aura

or your life initially, eventually it will. The soul is strengthened and its part
in the divine plan is served. There have been many cases when pioneers in
any field of life do not get to see the results of all their hard work. Later
generations gain the benefits. Yet that energy still blesses those who
pioneered such things. The spiritual lesson here is to pursue what you know
you are meant to do, even if you are not immediately seeing the rewards of
such efforts. Eventually you will see the effects of your efforts and your
aura will reflect that manifestation. Life balances out.
Essential rays you’ll need to work with in strengthening your job
avenue are the gold light for strength and courage, the white light for
upliftment and illumination, the bright orange for motivation and healthy
ambition, and the silver light for guidance and direction and to stimulate
activity. Let’s look at some specific job situations and how to work with the
light in relation to them.
Choosing a Profession
It’s interesting how some people know exactly what they want to do in life
while others are not so sure. For the ones who know what they want, there
are few questions concerning which direction to take. However, for a great
many people, deciding what to do is not such a straightforward matter.
Fortunately, all of us have a purpose in life and this purpose is reflected in
your aura. Your aura can show you where your strengths and talents lie. A
child who has pronounced musical ability would be a natural fit for a career
in music. Someone who is very focused, with a sharp, analytical mind,
would have what it takes to become a very good scientist. By following
your natural gifts and desires, you avoid “barking up the wrong tree” when
it comes to a career. By working with spiritual energy you can gain a clearer
perspective on your career potential. Whether bricklayer or architect, all are
part of the divine plan.
For tuning in to the kind of career you are meant to pursue, work with
divine guidance and direction (see Chapter 13). When it comes to a career,
there is a spiritual plan for each of us. Recognizing your true calling is a
matter of tuning into that purpose. The reason some people are so clear
about what they want is that they are in touch with their spiritual purpose.
So, if you are unclear about your goals, it’s time to get to work and open up

to inspiration and illumination. This can take time and repeated effort. Also,
our purpose is not always one single thing. You may already have
completed several things in your career life, but something is left
unfinished. Regardless of where you are in the journey, by building up the
spiritual power and staying with it, eventually you will connect with your
full career destiny.
I recommend starting your light work with a thorough cleansing with
the purifying rays to release any mental confusion and stress that may be
blocking the clear picture of what you’re meant to do. Once that clearing is
done, the two key rays to work with are the gold and silver energies. The
gold will help bring in the illumination to get a clear picture of the direction
you should take and the silver will give you greater perceptive power to
understand what your Higher Self is saying to you. Start with the golden ray
to touch into your Higher Self Point. Then see that energy going into your
mental body, quickening it with the light so that you connect with the
guidance given.
Meditative Prayer with the Gold Light to Find a Profession
“Down-ray the golden ray of wisdom light into my Higher Self Point of
Spiritual Knowing, to receive guidance and direction in finding my chosen
profession.”
(Hold for a moment to feel the connection being made.)
“I ask that this light down-ray to my mental body to connect me with the
guidance being given so that I may envision what my true profession is.”
After your meditation, hold to the knowing that your right work is
forthcoming. As with all types of divine direction, the answers may or may
not be given to you at that moment. Either way, you have begun generating
the power to manifest the work you are meant to do. Continue with
whatever job search you are on, but try to feel which way the light is

directing you. Generally, you will sense the light moving more strongly in
one career direction than another. This is God’s way of inspiring you to
your right occupation and livelihood.
Then add the silver ray to quicken your mental body so that you are
receptive to spiritual inspiration and illumination. Silver is also a guidance
ray and can bring in clarity of mind and heart.
Meditative Prayer with the Silver Ray to Find a Profession
“Down-ray the silver ray of divine intelligence to quicken my mental body
to perceive and better comprehend the divine inspiration of my true
profession being given to me. I also ask that this silver ray touch into the
Hermetic center to open my heart and desire to pursue my highest good.”
Generating a New Job
If you’re already clear about what you want to do, and you are looking for a
specific kind of job, you can work with the light to help you create the job
you envision. As we have seen, to generate a new job you first need to start
generating that energy on the spiritual level. Everything that manifests
physically was first created on the spiritual plane. By building the light for
your new job in the spiritual dimension first, you are taking the first step in
creating that job on the physical plane.
Both the gold and white rays are helpful in generating a profession. The
golden ray of wisdom light has the ability to quicken your Hermetic center
and open your path. Sometimes you can be right for a job but there is
outside interference. The golden light gives you extra power to break
through any dissenting energy and open up the right path for you. Gold can
also give you stamina when you may feel like giving up the fight.
Raise your consciousness into your Higher Self Point and ask the
golden ray to touch all levels of your consciousness, especially to touch into
your Hermetic center.

Meditative Prayer with the Gold Light to Generate New Work
“Down-ray the golden ray of wisdom light to touch into my Hermetic
center and generate new avenues of work, cutting through any negative
blocks and giving me the inner strength and divine power to pursue my path
and open up the job that’s right for me.”
Then work with the pure white light. This ray will help to open the
actual flow of whatever job you’re seeking, thereby helping you to connect
with it. Sometimes you can be a little out of tune with the job you seek. It
may be what you want and are good at, but you’re just not clicking with the
marketplace you’re trying to enter. The pure white light can help you
synchronize with the work you are seeking. It can also help to release
internal blocks. However, if you notice a lot of internal strife, work on
clearing that energy separately from this work, primarily with the Hermetic
center, but ask the light to touch into all the centers.
Meditative Prayer with the White Light to Find New Work
“Down-ray the pure white light into my Hermetic center, activating it in a
clockwise motion to quicken all my human Earth affairs, helping me to tune
in and open up to the work that’s right for me, and giving me the vision to
recognize that work when I see it.”
Adding the silver ray can help your new job open up quickly.
Meditative Prayer to Generate a New Job Quickly
“Down-ray the silver ray of divine intelligence directly into my Hermetic
center and out-ray into my human Earth affairs to bring forth my new job
quickly, according to divine law and love for the good of all concerned.”

It’s also a good idea to work with the bright orange ray of motivation
(not to be confused with the orange-red flame of purification). The bright
orange ray will bring in ambition to success. It is especially helpful if
something has dampened your spirits—this energy will bring in new
enthusiasm.
Meditative Prayer to Generate a Motivation
“Down-ray the bright orange ray of motivation and enthusiasm into my
Hermetic center to stimulate this center with a greater desire and ambition
to succeed.”
Once your light work is done, you need to trust that the light will do the
job you’ve asked it to do. Conclude with the following prayer: “I hold to the
knowing that the work I love is forthcoming. So be it.”
Dead-End Jobs
When I was still in college, I had many plans for my future. Financial
troubles at home forced me to postpone my dreams and take up temp work
to make ends meet. I was despondent, thinking I’d never do the things I
really wanted to do in life. I went to ask the advice of well-known spiritual
teacher and philosopher Manly P. Hall. One of his many inspiring
aphorisms was “The universe always has work for those who are qualified
to perform it.” I respected his work and could see by his aura that he was a
spiritually advanced soul. I met him in his office and started to pour my
heart out, telling him all that was going on with me. I kept saying to him, “I
have all these obstacles.” He stopped me at one point and simply said,
“What obstacles?” That stopped me dead in my tracks. I recognized then
that he was right. I was allowing these immediate concerns to obscure my
long-term goals. If I saw them as obstacles, I’d never get past them. Well, I
did go through some tough times, but sure enough—things did eventually
open up for me.

If you are in a dead-end job, the first thing to do is acknowledge that
you need to make a change. You have to make an effort. This will take
courage, but there is no other way. You need to get back to what it is you
want in life and not let the momentary necessities cloud your vision. When
you’re doing work that you know is not your calling, it can feel frustrating.
Yet, here is where you have to apply the principle of spiritual joy in the
workplace. There are many times when you have to do things that are not to
your liking, but there’s always a lesson to be learned in these experiences.
They only become stifling when you maintain that bad attitude and do
nothing to change these conditions. No matter what the job, you still need a
positive attitude and must respect the work at hand. Then these present job
experiences will not seem so frustrating or permanent.
Work with the golden ray to help create the courage needed to break the
cycle you’re in and to begin generating the job you need. Again, if there are
emotional or mental blocks, you’ll need to work on those separately. Also,
work with the love ray if you’re being too hard on yourself.
Meditative Prayer for Courage in Finding Work
“Down-ray the golden ray of wisdom light into my Hermetic center and
out-ray into my human Earth affairs to dispel any negative work patterns
and to give me the courage and dynamic power to pursue the work I love.”
Once you get the light working for you, you can follow the Divine Light
recommendations for generating a new job or for finding your chosen field.
Unhappy at Work
I have counseled many people who have good jobs but still are unhappy at
what they do. They are unhappy because of friction with other people or
because they simply are not enamored with their work. I have found that
sometimes people who are unhappy with their work are not really suited for
their jobs and chose that line of work for the wrong reasons.

Too many people choose a career solely for the money. For example,
there are doctors who practice medicine not because they love the healing
arts, but because the pay is good, the prestige high. A tremendous amount of
dedicated work and responsibility go into being a doctor. Anyone whose
motivation is money soon discovers that he or she has paid a steep price for
doing something without love. People also pick jobs because they appear
glamorous. Or they may choose to enter a profession because others have
influenced their decision. A father may want his son or daughter to follow
in his footsteps, despite the child’s wishes to the contrary. Too often that son
or daughter complies out of love or for fear of disappointing the parents.
What inevitably follows is rebellion, a life of “quiet desperation,” or, with
grace, an awakening and shift to their true calling.
Review your inventory list and see if you picked up on anything about
your work by direct observation. If not, you need to do some reflecting to
gain some insight into what about your job is bothering you.
Until you’ve identified what’s bothering you, it’s hard to know exactly
which power rays to work with. If the situation turns out to be more a
people problem, turn to the chapter on relationships to see how to work
with the light in professional environments. If the condition results from
dislike of the actual work, then you need to call upon the gold and white, as
you would to get out of a dead-end job. Even if you’re in a high-paying job,
if it’s not for you, that job’s not going to help you much in your spiritual
growth. You’ll need courage and vision to branch out in new directions.
Another reason people are unhappy at work is that jobs are becoming
more all-consuming. It seems that any job worth its salt these days demands
ten to twelve hours a day, or even more. Many people love what they do but
still become frustrated at their work and eventually “burn out” because the
stress is just too much. Such demands put enormous pressure on your
personal life as well. By working so intensely, it’s easy to fall out of the
spiritual rhythm. And when you’re out of rhythm, anything can happen.
Watch out for jobs that demand too much of you. If you’re already in
such a job, work with the emerald green ray of balance to keep harmony. To
help relieve stress, do your best not to carry your job home with you. Give
it your best effort at work, and then cut loose when you go home. Change
the pace. Release your mind, especially in bed at night. Don’t let your last
thoughts before going to sleep be stressful ones about work.

Getting Fired
There’s certainly a strong element of shock in getting fired. If you are fired
—for whatever reason—you’ll want to work with the peace ray to release
that shock. You’ll also need to do some mental/emotional work with the
emerald green, because once the shock has worn off, there’s bound to be
some sort of reaction such as anger, resentment, or depression. It’s also easy
for you to start feeling sorry for yourself and fall into a state of self-pity.
This is the time to work things out. Don’t give yourself time to sulk. Why
did you get fired? If it was politics, then you know it was not about you. If
you were fired because of something you did or didn’t do, then you must
take responsibility. Don’t beat yourself over the head or feel humiliated.
Instead, find out where the problem is and fix it!
Here are two meditations to help you overcome the shock of losing your
job and to help maintain your spiritual equilibrium.
Meditative Prayer to Overcome Shock
“Down-ray the purple ray of spiritual peace to touch into all levels of my
consciousness, releasing me from all shock and establishing the silence of
peace and the peace of silence throughout my entire being.”
Follow up with the emerald green ray to help keep things in perspective.
Meditative Prayer for Spiritual Balance
“Down-ray the emerald green ray to all levels of my being to balance my
entire consciousness so that my thinking is clear and my actions are moving
in divine rhythm and order.”


CHAPTER 11
STRENGTHENING RELATIONSHIPS
SPIRITUAL ENERGY HAS A beneficial effect on all types of human
relationships. The light helps build friendships, dispel discord, clarify
misunderstanding, and keep relationships moving harmoniously. It can also
help to draw the right people to one another. Working with Divine Light
won’t necessarily resolve every dilemma, but what it will do if you are
diligent is help to resolve your part in that dilemma. Most of all, the light
gives you the power to see other people beyond their personality self and in
their true, divine self.
The primary element in any relationship is love. Without love, no
relationship can work beneficently. Love connects us to each other, to
creation, and to God. When dealing with others, you’re going to work a
great deal with the deep rose pink ray of spiritual love. I don’t think there’s
such a thing as getting too much of this loving energy.
Love comes in many forms. Regardless of the expression, if love is real
it emanates from the same spiritual source—God. Along with Divine Mind,
God’s Divine Love is the most powerful primary force in the universe. It
emanates directly from the heart of God. Divine Love is the bond that holds
all creation together. It’s the heartbeat of life itself. Without this love,
there’d be no purpose to life, no desire to create or act on anything. There’d
still be Divine Mind, but no reason to express it. An act of Divine Love
created each of us. God’s love is what carries us through the trials and
tribulations of our pilgrimage through creation and back to God.
The expression of Divine Love can be described as pure and
unconditional when you love without thought of return. We see this love
when people put others before themselves or risk their lives for others. This
high love leads to the ultimate universal love. Divine Love embodies all the
attributes of the spiritual life, such as gentleness, kindness, understanding,

and compassion. There’s a tremendous exhilaration and upliftment that
accompanies such celestial love. Best of all, Divine Love is eternal. It’s
always there for you. It will never disappoint or let you down.
Human love is also spiritual, but it’s graded down to the physical level.
This love is more restrictive. Human love desires things of this world.
People may love having a big house, a fast car, the money they make, the
way their spouse looks, or the things that are done for them. There’s nothing
wrong with loving such things, but they are temporal and usually
conditional. If the quality or thing that the person is getting is diminished or
taken away, then the love can fade.
The goal of all your relationships is to transform them into acts of
Divine Love. As part of your soul development, you’re in the process of
developing your love flow. When you give love before getting love, when
you express love without thought of return, you’re building that Divine
Love state. Sometimes, it’s the most demanding things asked in
relationships that can be the very key to your spiritual transformation. There
is the story of a famous author who fathered a mentally challenged son. The
condition left the boy totally dependent on his parents to take care of almost
all his physical functions. The father was a proud person and was
humiliated and embarrassed by his son’s condition. He resented the boy,
calling him his “little monster.”
When the boy was several years old, it became evident that the child
had a gift for music despite his difficulties. This awakened something in the
father. He realized that his son was not a “little monster” at all and that
there was a soul inside trying to express itself. The father’s attitude
completely changed. He realized that the issue was not his son’s disability
but his own pride. He came to love the boy and dedicated himself to helping
him in every way he could. It turned out that the boy grew up to become a
famous pianist, more famous than his father. The son continued to need
physical help for even the most basic things, like shaving, but his father was
always there for him. This man showed a great spiritual transformation,
from severe disappointment and ignorance to selfless love. His trial was a
great opportunity to learn the spiritual lessons of love.
You’re here to learn the lessons of life—and many times you learn them
from others. Once you learn how to love others regardless of their
imperfections, then you’re showing your capacity to love the divine. As the
Bible says, “He that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he

love God whom he hath not seen?” (1 John 4:20). You can’t be very close to
loving God if you’re at war with others. All problems in relationships stem
from a lack of love shown in one way or another. So many people say they
love, but do they really?
Most of us know how important love is. We can understand the
principles of Divine Love in the abstract, but sometimes it seems so hard to
actually apply these principles in real-life situations. Wise souls have been
professing spiritual love for centuries. Why is it so difficult to put into
action? Why isn’t the world a more loving place? Our nemesis is our own
human ego—the petty ego, the puffed-up little “i” that keeps getting in the
way of our natural love flow. Our human nature likes to hold on to its
jealousies, angers, and hatreds, even though these are the very bonds that
hold us back and make us suffer. In our petty self, we can’t see beyond the
immediate narrow field of whatever is happening in our lives. We’re afraid
to venture out beyond the familiar. Even though it’s our nature to love, we
get in the way of our own expression of that love when we allow the
imperfections of our human ego to take control of our lives.
Love is an essential element to your aura. One of the first things I look
for in reading auras is how the love energy is moving. This reveals how
connected to the divine the person is. The primary energy to look for is
deep rose pink. This can show in a variety of ways in the aura depending on
the type of love and how strongly it’s being expressed. Rose pink light can
be seen in the chakras or sometimes as a band of pink light around the
perimeter of the aura, which shows a loving nature.
Most of us have some deep rose pink in our auras, indicating that we
have some of that spiritual love already and are expressing it in some way.
We may not recognize it as spiritual, but it is. What generally happens,
though, is that we taint this love with our own selfish wants. Someone may
genuinely love someone, but at the same time be very selfish in that love.
The deep rose pink will be in the aura but mixed with some cocoa brown,
which expresses the selfishness. Or they may be possessive in love, which
mixes the pink with avocado green. There can be lust in love, which adds
vitiated red to the pink.
Much more rare to see is the high, divine, selfless love. With this
celestial love, a light pale pink and violet will accompany the deep rose
pink and is seen above the head. This is the love that expresses when people
think of someone else’s interests above their own. This high pink energy

usually comes and goes in most people. It’s very hard to sustain such an
energy unless you’re living a life of selfless service.
The avenue of your world affairs in the Hermetic center that deals with
human relationships is, appropriately, the pink ray. This ray connects you to
Divine Love and opens your feeling nature. Without this ray, it would be
very difficult to have healthy relationships. This loving ray can express
itself in all aspects of life: love of people, art, music, animals, nature, etc.
Like the other rays of your human Earth affairs, this ray cannot be
destroyed or disappear no matter what you do, but it can become weakened
if you are set on closing your heart. The deepest place in your aura that love
registers is in your Hermetic center, because this is where desires are born
—in the soul.
You can work with the love ray directly to increase your spiritual
capacity for love. Begin working with the deep rose pink at all levels of
your being. See it going into the four main centers, especially your heart
center, and into your soul levels. You can follow the meditative prayer in
Chapter 6 on spiritual love or use the following meditative prayer.
Meditative Prayer to Increase Divine Love Flow
“Down-ray the deep rose pink of spiritual love into all levels of my
consciousness, igniting my spiritual centers with this Divine Light and
especially touching into my Hermetic center and soul levels to release any
old hurts and soul wounds, and to uplift me into the divine ecstasy of Thy
infinite love and everlasting embrace.”
Auric Interactions
When you interact with someone, not only is there an exchange of words,
ideas, and feelings, there’s an exchange of spiritual energy. This exchange is
normal and natural. We all know how exhilarating a positive exchange with
someone else can be or how debilitating and disturbing a negative exchange
can be.

Many people unintentionally take exchange to an extreme and depend
on the energy of another rather than turning to the divine source. You want
to have exhilarating exchanges with others, but not to the point of moving
out of your divine center and becoming dependent on another’s energy. One
of the things you are doing when working with spiritual energy is learning
to draw on your own divine source for spiritual power and nourishment and
love. This connection with the divine helps you be less dependent on others,
which in turn has the effect of enhancing your relationships. It keeps your
auric interactions moving on a positive, high level. While various facets of
the aura can intermingle, most auric energy interactions occur within the
energy centers themselves. Since these centers are receiving and
transmitting stations, it makes sense that they play a key role in the
exchange of energy. Here is an example of how auras interact.
Two People Fighting
In this scenario, Person A has started an argument with Person B. (See
Illustration 11.1.) Vitiated red energy of anger shoots from the emotional
center of Person A to Person B. If B accepts this negative energy, which has
happened in this case, then it will immediately hit B in the emotional center.
Person B has now become incensed and reacts with anger to Person A,
sending a vitiated red energy back to A’s emotional center, thereby
accelerating the argument. At this point, the fight can turn into a screaming
match as the energies escalate. As angry thoughts and barbed words fly
back and forth, energy moves from the emotional to the mental centers,
destabilizing the thinking levels and further inflaming the destructive
exchange. This is a fairly typical example of a full-blown fight.
Refusing an Angry Outburst
In this example, Person A is still directing anger at Person B, but this time B
is completely refusing the negative energy. (See Illustration 11.2.) As a
result, that negative energy does not enter the energy field of Person B.
Instead, it simply dissipates. Not only does this keep B’s aura clean, it also
stops the escalation that would result if B were to give in to A’s negative
influence. In this example, B has put on a mantle of spiritual protection, so

the energy does not penetrate the auric shell. Yet, even without protection, if
B were still adamant about refusing to react, A’s negative energy would not
get much farther into her aura.
Two People Fighting : ILLUSTRATION 11.1

Refusing an Angry Outburst : ILLUSTRATION 11.2
Family
Let’s now look at how to apply the light in specific types of relationships.
We’ll begin with family. We all know the importance of family and its
relation to our well-being. The family unit is the backbone of society and
one of our main support systems in life. Family experiences usually set the
tone for our feelings and beliefs about ourselves, others, and life in general.
Family is where we start building our relationships with people. It’s where
we learn how to give and take, and how to love. The importance of a strong
family life cannot be overstated. When we have a good family experience,
we carry that stability and confidence throughout life. It’s a powerful
foundation we can build on. Conversely, growing up in a dysfunctional
family can create difficulties in future relationships if we don’t take the time
to bring the energy into a more positive flow and rise above that experience.
Helping to heal family traumas has been a recurring theme in my
spiritual counseling work. I remember one case that was especially

touching. There was a boy whose parents were killed in a car accident. He
had no other living relatives and was put in an orphanage. A couple soon
adopted him, and they tried to do everything for the child. The boy was
heartbroken and would often cry through the night for his biological
parents. He would express his frustration and anger to his adoptive mother,
saying things like, “I don’t like you. I don’t want you. I want my mommy
back.” The woman did the best she could, but as time went on, things didn’t
get any better. The boy became more intolerant and difficult. The adoptive
father was away a great deal on business trips, so it fell to the woman to
care for the child. She didn’t know how to handle him and wondered if she
had done the right thing in adopting him. She loved him, but in her
frustration at his lack of cooperation she made several mistakes, including
slapping him a few times, which compounded the problem.
She came to me for counseling and began to work with the light to try to
turn things around. First she turned to the love ray, to instill more patience
and love in herself, so that her natural love could flow more freely. At the
same time, frustration and anger that had caused her to mishandle so many
situations needed to be released. She also brought in the silver ray to guide
her in understanding and dealing with the boy better. Then she worked with
the pink ray, sending it to him to help him heal from the loss of his parents
and to show that she really loved him. She also used emerald green and
gold for balance and strength to manage his difficult behavior. This went on
for several months until, finally, the boy started warming up to her. They
began to go out and do things together, which had never happened before,
and a very warm and loving relationship began to grow.
Many times, your most intense conflicts occur within your own family.
This may seem a paradox: if the family unit is such a critical part of your
development and character, then why does it so often turn out to be a major
source of discord? Many dynamics come into play, but generally your
biggest joys and tests in human relationships will be with members of your
own family. The family experience can touch into the deepest recesses of
the human soul. Karma plays a huge part in family dynamics. You can’t
always control the circumstances that are coming your way, but you can
control the effects of those experiences so they don’t haunt or limit you.
Working with spiritual energy can have a very positive effect on any type of
family dynamic, helping to strengthen ties and resolve conflicts. The best
time to call on the light for help is as you are going through any difficult

periods. If the family discord is past but the effects are still there, the light
can cleanse the aura of any old traumas and memories.
Parent to Child
In understanding parent-child relationships it’s important to recognize that it
was no accident that determined the family you were born into or the family
you have built. In the spiritual dimension, you have agreed to this family
situation as part of your soul’s experience. It doesn’t matter whether you
were born into wealth or poverty, good parents or bad parents, or even
raised as an orphan with no parental support at all. This is all part of the
greater plan of life.
There’s an old saying, “Give me the first seven years of a person’s life
and you can have the rest.” In the first seven years, key character traits and
tendencies are established. How that person is brought up, and the kinds of
stimuli and experiences the person is exposed to, will shape his or her
character from that time on.
Some would argue that our character is completely developed in our
early years because the soul is a blank slate, so to speak. Our upbringing is
everything, as there is no predisposition. The metaphysical point of view
does not agree with this. Despite the strong influence of upbringing and
environment, spiritually speaking, a child has a life independent of these
factors. We had a life prior to physical existence and we have a life after as
well. This Earth life is a stage in our spiritual development. Because of this
we are in eventual control of any family influence.
From the spiritual point of view, the first seven years do indeed have a
unique place in a soul’s development. It takes seven years for key auric
energies to establish themselves within the consciousness. When the child is
very young, the aura and consciousness are very adaptable and fluid. This is
necessary because the soul is learning so many new things, it needs to
acclimate to its environment quickly. So in these early years the child is
especially impressionable. By the time a child is seven, the auric energy is
set, and the person begins a new phase in its unfolding development. This
means that in the first seven years, the auric flow is very pliable. If there has
been a disturbance, it can be more easily fixed. After age seven, of course, it

can still be done but now it requires more effort. So those first seven years
are critical.
This means that the most crucial time for parents to nurture and love
their child is in the early formative years. Love is important all the time, but
it’s especially important then. Nurturing means sacrifice, time, dedication,
and energy. It means learning how to care for the child. When a child is
born, the first people it meets are its parents. The child’s natural instinct is
to look up to the parents.
As a parent, it is important to recognize that your child is a full,
complete soul with free will and a destiny all its own. From the spiritual
perspective, up to age sixteen, parents have a karmic responsibility to care
for their child, and this includes making certain decisions on behalf of the
child. But parents need to do their best to honor the unique character traits
in the child and not try to simply mold the child in their own image. While
parents and children can build deep friendships, even later in life when the
child is an adult and on his or her own, in the formative years, the parents’
first job is to be the parent and a friend second. Even if the child is difficult
to deal with at times, it’s the parents’ job to bring out the best in the child
and do everything they can to help in the child’s maturity.
Sometimes parents can raise their child right and still there are
problems. This is because the soul within the child is still an individual with
its own tendencies and desires. It’s a delicate balance here at times. Parents
may look at the child and think it’s so cute and helpless, but connected to
that child is a full adult soul slowly establishing itself. Although parents are
responsible for the child’s upbringing, they are not responsible for that
child’s evolution. The soul within the child is responsible for its own
spiritual development.
Child to Parent
One of the key jobs of the child is to honor the parent. It’s a divine
agreement and even if the child does not agree with everything the parent
does, it’s the child’s job to follow the parent’s guidance as far as possible.
When the child is an adult, of course, the child assumes responsibility for
his or her own life. The parent has to be careful not to still try to dictate the

affairs of the child or make decisions for the child once he or she is grown.
The child continues to honor the parent, but the spiritual dynamics change.
Some are very strong and pass through family adversity, while others
are haunted by childhood traumas, which can stay with them for the rest of
their lives. The thing to see is that you have the ability to pass through and
rise above any conditions in your life. God always gives you the spiritual
courage to pass through any trial. Abraham Lincoln grew up so poor he was
not even taught how to read. He taught himself by moonlight. So whatever
handicap or trying situation you’re faced with, you can remedy it, or make
things much better. If you had a difficult childhood, you can release that
energy and create the life you dream of. You now have spiritual tools to heal
those conditions. It’s part of your destiny to work your way out of those
limitations.
Siblings
Brothers and sisters can be your best friends throughout life, or they can be
irritating, a cause of friction, or even indifferent, drifting away to become
strangers. The usual underlying cause of friction between siblings is rivalry
or jealousy. One child may feel he or she got the short end of the stick.
Perhaps a parent has a favorite child and the other child resents it. It’s a
mistake that parents often make, usually without even knowing it. Or it
could be that one child has an outstanding talent and is getting more
attention because of it, which may excite jealousy in a brother or sister. As
we know, these rivalries can be carried over into adulthood.
The Light and Family
If you are having problems with a family member, pull out all the stops to
help turn things around. You want to be particularly careful not to simply
blame the other person or persons for what’s going on. Search your heart to
see what your contribution might be to the present dilemma. Then use the
light to help keep yourself above the turmoil going on around you. This will
help not only you, but all the family members involved, so they can begin
to see things from a spiritual perspective. As in any type of relationship,
sometimes the other person will respond to the light, sometimes not. The

main focus should be on building your own light rays to face what you are
going through with courage and fortitude. You will most likely have to use a
combination of energy techniques, including a mental/emotional clearing,
forgiveness, and perhaps divine guidance. Your situation is not going
unnoticed by the divine. The Higher Self understands the challenges you are
facing and is doing everything to help. The spiritual life is far more
understanding and attuned to the sufferings of humanity than we give it
credit for. It does everything it can to help alleviate that suffering.
In addition to whichever rays you feel you need to use for the particular
situation you are in, I also recommend that you include these meditative
prayers to help lighten the load of your family difficulties. Again, you need
to be patient with these dilemmas. Their roots are deep, and it takes time
and persistent effort for things to be worked out.
Meditative Prayer to Help Alleviate Family Discord
“Down-ray the pure white light into all levels of my being, releasing me of
any animosities connected with (name person). I ask that the purity and
power of this divine white light go to (name person) and me, touching deep
within our souls and lifting our spirits and awareness of our oneness with
God. I place this entire situation on the altar of God, releasing all lower
vibrations and any heavy burdens or pressure.”
Take your time with this prayer to really feel the white light touching
deeply into your auric field. If you find you still have difficulty finding the
strength to face the situation, add the following prayer. In this particular
light work, you are bringing down two energies at the same time.
Meditative Prayer for Soul Upliftment
“Down-ray the gold and emerald green rays into all levels of my
consciousness and especially my soul levels, to give me the courage and
strength to resolve this family situation in Thy Divine Light and Love.”

Keep the light and protection strongly around you after doing this work.
Spiritual Connection of Parent and Child
In addition to the normal family dynamics, a very special auric connection
exists between parent and child. This spiritual connection can be seen at the
emotional level. It appears as a ray of gold light connecting each parent
with the child at the emotional center. It’s referred to as the umbilical
connection because it almost looks like the physical umbilical cord between
fetus and mother. Yet in this case, the spiritual umbilical connection exists
with both father and mother. This umbilical connection is there because the
child needs a great influx of spiritual nourishment while growing up. You
can clairvoyantly see energy being transmitted through the cord. I have seen
beautiful pink and violet energies flowing from the parent to the child.
This connection stays with the child and parent until the death of the
parent. Once the child is grown, the connection is not as strong as in
childhood, but it’s still very much there. This tells us that the parent and
child relationship is one of the more unique human relationships we will
have in life, again another reason to honor it. This umbilical connection
exists with the biological parents only. Even biological parents who have
nothing to do with their child’s upbringing will still have the connection,
but it will be very weak. It means that the child has to build this emotional
support in other ways.
If parents do not treat their child well, they may transmit energy that is
not of a high vibration. You as the child can refuse this energy, but it does
require effort. Here is a meditative prayer to help clear out that vibration. If
needed, do a separate prayer for each parent.
Meditative Prayer to Cleanse and Uplift the Spiritual Umbilical
Connection
“Down-ray the pure white light into my emotional center, filling it with Thy
pure divine essence. Out-ray through my spiritual umbilical connection
with my (name parent), releasing all destructive energies directed toward
me intentionally or unintentionally. I ask for special protection with the

white light and gold light to be placed at my emotional center to keep me
uplifted and in my own divine center.”
Friends
True friends are among our greatest blessings. The only reason for people to
be friends is natural affinity and desire to be together. There’s no formal
commitment. The bond of friendship is forged out of love. It’s built on
loyalty, honesty, and trust. In the aura, it’s often seen as a beautiful
exchange of lemon yellow energy at the mental level, because friends share
common interests, and a pink exchange of energy at the Hermetic level,
expressing the love and comradeship friends feel for each other. One of the
greatest forms of friendship is the spiritual brotherhood that’s formed by
two people walking the path of light together.
The key to friendship is simple: “To have a friend, be a friend.” If you
feel lonely and desire real friendship, don’t bemoan your fate and feel sorry
for yourself. Go out and express friendship! Make yourself available.
Eventually people of the same affinities as you will be attracted to you. One
of the most beautiful things about working with the Divine Light is that you
naturally attract people to you. As your aura brightens, people find
themselves drawn to you, and some wonderful friendships can be formed.
Don’t push things. You can’t make someone like you; it has to happen
naturally. Use the deep rose pink ray to create a more loving auric energy
that helps to attract new friends. The following is a meditative prayer to
help attract new people to you.
Meditative Prayer to Attract New Friends
“Down-ray the deep rose pink of spiritual love to all my centers, especially
my emotional center, generating more love in my consciousness and
strongly opening my path to attract new friends and to strengthen the bonds
of friendship I already have. I ask this in Divine Light and Love for the
good of all concerned.”

Professional
Professional relationships have their own unique energetic dynamics. The
point of professional relationships is to work together toward a common
goal. Since career is very connected to your purpose in life, the people you
work with are sharing in that cooperative purpose. Remember, your
professional aspirations are never about just you. For the spiritual energy to
be balanced and productive, everyone has to be effectively playing their
part, like the movement of a fine Swiss timepiece. It doesn’t matter if you
are the president of the company or working in the mail room, each is
making his or her important contribution and needs to be honored and
respected. While there may be differences of opinions or approaches,
cooperation and collaboration form the cornerstone to healthy and
successful professional relationships.
When involved in a professional relationship, remember this
affirmation:
“God is the employer and God is the employee.”
Too many people cast their superiors in an adversarial role. This can
make one fearful or resentful of that person’s authority. Remember that by
serving your employer to the best of your ability, you’re serving God. It’s
reassuring to know that God is the only true boss. You may disagree with
your boss, but you can’t judge the situation because you don’t know all that
person is dealing with in that position. There are spiritual lessons in playing
the role of boss or employee. If you don’t like your station in life, then work
to change it. Yet honor where you are by doing your best in the situation
you are in.
If you are an employer it’s important to honor the divine in those who
are working for you. Employees are not your underlings to do with as you
please. You are in a position of responsibility and you must honor that
position by seeing your leadership role as an act of divine service. Your first
job is to inspire those working for you. Encourage their inner creative
nature to express itself. Recognize the divine part they are playing. Many
people in positions of power are insecure. Although they may not show it,
many are not confident in the position they are in and try to mask that by
being aggressive or unreasonable. Remember, it is God who put you in the

leadership role. Serve God by serving your employees and watch how the
relationships blossom.
The same spiritual principles apply to coworkers. There may be
jealousies and competition among fellow workers for recognition and
promotions, and this can create a lot of stress. Look at your work associates
in the same compassionate spiritual light. They, too, have the divine spark
in them and are in a spiritual growth process. Look for ways to collaborate
more effectively, even if they are not always showing you the same
courtesy. Take the magnanimous position.
When it comes to professional relationships, two essential power rays to
work with are the deep rose pink and the emerald green to create greater
love and harmony. The silver ray is a good energy to work with when there
is difficulty in communication. If there’s already been confrontation, do the
forgiveness work and try for a fresh start. If the relationship has become
adversarial, follow the meditative prayer given in the next section, below,
for restoring harmony to relationships.
Meditative Prayer for Cooperation in the Workplace
“Down-ray the deep rose pink ray of spiritual love to touch into my
Hermetic center and out-ray to fill with Divine Love and compassion for
everyone I work with. May I see them as the divine spark that they are. I
ask that this uplifting love ray bless everyone I work with so there is mutual
cooperation and respect.”
Then follow up with the emerald green ray.
Meditative Prayer for Harmony in the Workplace
“Down-ray the emerald green ray of spiritual balance and harmony to touch
into my Hermetic center and out-ray to my worldly affairs, quickening my
workplace with this divine harmony. May all whom I come in contact with

feel and respond to the divine impulse of this holy light. I ask this in Divine
Light and Love for the good of all concerned.”
Adversaries
Our “enemies” present our biggest tests. How you handle adversarial
relationships is one of the clearest indicators of your true character. There’s
a story about Mother Teresa when she was first setting up her hospital for
the destitute. She had encountered a great deal of resistance from a local
Hindu priest. He did everything he could to stop her work, because she was
not Indian and not a Hindu. Mother Teresa did not react to his diatribes.
Even when the priest became deathly ill—and was ostracized by his own
faithful—he continued to despise Mother Teresa. However, no one would
help him during his time of trial and need—no one, that is, but Mother
Teresa. When she heard that he was dying, she immediately took him in and
treated him with the same love and affection that she showed to all the sick
and dying. He could not believe that this woman could shower so much
kindness upon someone who had hated her so. He eventually died, but not
without asking her forgiveness. News of what she’d done traveled, because
all knew how much trouble the priest had caused her. It was this particular
incident that put Mother Teresa on the road to international fame.
If you are faced with animosity, the following exercise is very helpful in
disconnecting the tangle of energies involved. It may or may not remove the
person from your life entirely, but it will definitely help to release the
destructive connections that most likely exist between you.
In this particular meditation, raise your consciousness and see yourself
in a bubble of pink and white light. Feel it enveloping you and uplifting all
levels of your being. See the golden bubble of protection strongly around
you. Then, using the following prayer, ask the light to release you and the
other person from any negative energetic exchanges.
Meditative Prayer to Release Adversarial Relationships

“I ask the Divine Light of God to go to (name person) and myself, releasing
us mental to mental, emotional to emotional, physical to physical, astral to
astral, and soul to soul. Free me and free (name person) in this Divine Light
and Love. I ask it all in Thy holy name.”
Repeat this exercise as you need to. Notice on how many levels this
meditation is working. The irony of an adversarial relationship is the
strange attachment that exists between people who may hate each other.
Strongly negative feelings can attach you to the other person just as
strongly as love. Elie Wiesel observed that the opposite of love is not hate,
but indifference. You must detach from hate if you really want to be free of
another person’s influence. In addition, keep your balance strong when
dealing with such a person.
Romance and Marriage
Now we focus the light on one of the most volatile and dynamic of all
human relations—the romantic interaction. There have been so many
questions, debates, so-called rules, and conflicting opinions about the true
nature of romantic involvement and sexual relations that many people are
cynical and disillusioned about the whole process of dating. This has been
reflected in unrealistic expectations, high divorce rates, broken families,
and a host of mental and emotional miseries.
The male-female relationship is a sacred one. Physical evolution
divided the sexes into male and female as a manifestation of its spiritual
counterpart—the dynamic and magnetic nature of life. The dynamic-
magnetic polarity is the very essence of all manifested life. It’s the give and
take, the ebb and flow of life. This duality of active life may be seen at all
levels of creation. Even God manifests as the Dynamic Father principle and
as the Magnetic Holy Mother principle. It is the cosmic union of these two
forces of life that give birth to our human soul.
The key feature of the dynamic nature is mind. God the Father is Divine
Mind in action. He is the giving out, the initial step, inner strength, divine
will, and wisdom. The key quality of the magnetic nature is heart. God the
Holy Mother is love. She is compassion, love, beauty, unity, nurturing, and

desire. All created life interplays between these two poles, producing
cosmic balance and the spiritual rhythms of life. Both aspects of God are of
equal importance. When we appear to be putting God the Father principle
before the Mother, it’s only in the sense that there needs to be an action
before there can be a reaction.
This brings us to the second principle of the male-female relationship:
within each of us exists this polarity of dynamic and magnetic activity. This
means that our soul is neither male nor female, but contains both divine
attributes of the dynamic-magnetic life. When we incarnate in physical
form, we polarize either our dynamic or our magnetic nature, depending on
the sex we become. This doesn’t mean the other isn’t there. By being born
male, we are meant to express the dynamic principle of our being. Yet we
must balance that dynamic with our magnetic nature. If we are born female,
we are meant to express our magnetic nature and balance it with our
dynamic flow. The spiritual goal is to balance the two flows, so that we can
express both spiritual qualities regardless of our gender.
There’s a divine reason you are born the sex that you are. It was not a
mistake or chance occurrence. The first step in creating greater harmony
with the opposite sex is to be comfortable and in harmony with your own
sex. If you are male, enjoy your maleness. If you are female, enjoy your
femaleness. There’s nothing wrong with expressing characteristics of your
sex as long as you keep things in perspective.
Problems can arise when one gender tries to dominate or manipulate the
other gender. You must never use gender advantages over another person,
but rather as a complement and counterpart. As part of your spiritual
growth, you’re meant to learn how to live in peace and joy with the
opposite sex. It’s one of the greatest blessings of physical life. A couple that
loves, honors, and stands up for each other is an ongoing work of spiritual
beauty. Romantic love helps to advance souls on the path to God.
These dynamic-magnetic flows express themselves very clearly in the
aura. The right side of the aura brings in the dynamic flows of light and the
left side attracts the magnetic flows. (See Illustration 11.3.) This polarity is
critical to a balanced aura. The right side tends to express gold, red, and
other dynamic energies while the left side will have pink, violet, and other
magnetic energies. Some energies can be both dynamic and magnetic, such
as the green and blue rays. In addition, the Higher Self will down-breathe

beautiful dynamic or magnetic rays to either the right or left side of the
aura, depending on the particular need.
If the aura is unbalanced in its dynamic-magnetic flow, the energy will
favor one side over the other. An overly magnetic soul will not have the
dynamic radiation needed on the right side, and an overly dynamic person
will generally not have the magnetic radiation needed on the left side. If
you are loving and kind but have no backbone, you must develop your
dynamic side while continuing to be kind and loving. In the same way, if
you are a go-getter to the point of stepping on other people’s toes, you must
learn to be more giving and kind, but still be that go-getter.
Dating
The key element in dating is compatibility. People can date for all sorts of
reasons, but to create healthy romantic exchanges, you want to find
someone you’re compatible with. The aura is very good at showing the
compatibility of couples. When two people are compatible, there is a
beautiful exchange of energy on the Hermetic and emotional levels. Usually
there will be pink, showing the love flow. Orange reveals the enthusiasm
and excitement that the couple have for each other. There will also be a
violet energy exchange, showing that there is a peace and serenity with the
other soul. They intuitively trust each other and are very comfortable with
each other. When I see this kind of energy exchange, I know these people
would most likely make a fine couple. If the two are incompatible, there
will usually be an exchange of gray energy. It will emanate from the
Hermetic center, showing that there is distress or worry going on.
If you’re having difficulty finding someone who’s compatible, you can
work with the light to help attract someone suitable. First you want to get an
idea of what it is you’re looking for. Rather than contemplating specific
physical traits, look for qualities such as a sense of humor, trustworthiness,
kindness, a giving nature, and so on. In the same way, evaluate the qualities
you have to offer another person. People often focus so much on what they
want in another person that they don’t look at what they themselves have to
offer. There has to be give and take. Practicing visualizations is very
effective here.

If you feel you have done all these things and still have not found
someone, then perhaps look to identify any possible negative thinking that
may be getting in the way of attracting what you want. For example, you
may say you want a marriage partner, but deep down, perhaps you’re not
ready to give up the pleasures and carefree quality of single life. Or you
may want someone very sincerely but feel you’re undeserving of a worthy
companion. All these issues are things you must confront and deal with
before you can attract the person you desire.
Polarity in the Aura : ILLUSTRATION 11.3

There are several ways to work with the light to attract the right person
to you. Clarity is a good place to start. If you’re in confusion, you will often
draw the wrong person to you. So, if you’re having trouble attracting a truly
compatible person, first do a spiritual cleansing with the orange-red flame
to release any wrong pictures and patterns you may have developed.
Then, work with the pure white light and ask that it touch into your
Higher Self Point to help set the energy in motion to draw the right person
to you.
Meditative Prayer to Attract the Right Romantic/Marital Partner
“Down-ray the pure white light to quicken all levels of my consciousness. I
ask that it especially touch into my Higher Self Point of Spiritual Knowing
to give me a clear picture of the person who is right for me.”
Follow up this work with the silver ray to quicken the recognition in
your mental body of the image being given to you. In this instance, the
silver ray will also help to better stabilize that image.
Meditative Prayer to Quicken the Mental Body
“Down-ray the silver ray of divine intelligence into my mental body to
quicken me in the recognition of the image of my rightful mate, given to me
by my Higher Self.”
I would also add the blue-white fire, as it can help sustain the energy
until that person can become a reality for you.
Meditative Prayer to Sustain the Rightful Image

“Down-ray the blue-white fire of eternal life to touch into all levels of my
consciousness and especially charge and recharge my mental body to hold
and sustain the image of my rightful romantic partner.”
With these three rays, you have greatly quickened your mental levels to
get your mind focused in the right direction. This way, when the right
person does come along, you will recognize him or her. Once you have
worked on the mental levels, follow up with the wisdom light. Now it’s
time to start setting the energy in motion to manifest your rightful partner.
Meditative Prayer to Attract a Romantic/Marital Partner
“Down-ray the golden ray of wisdom light to my Hermetic center and out-
ray in my human Earth affairs to attract the right person to me.”
Be patient when it comes to romance. You can’t force the right person to
appear in your life. In the same way, don’t be lazy and expect the dream
person to just suddenly appear. You have to put yourself out there and make
yourself available. As the saying goes, sometimes you have to kiss a few
frogs before you find your prince (or princess!).
Then crown your work with the deep rose pink ray of spiritual love.
Above all, love is the power that draws people together. It is the
indispensable element in any relationship. It helps balance the dynamic-
magnetic flow. Ask the love ray to touch into all levels of your
consciousness, but especially your emotional levels so that you are open
and will be accepting of the person coming into your life.
Meditative Prayer with the Love Ray in the Emotions
“Down-ray the deep rose pink ray of spiritual love to all levels of my being
and into my emotional body. Let this light bathe all levels of my emotional
nature, so I am coming from a place of love and kindness. And let this love

ray open my heart and emotions, so I am accepting of the rightful person
entering my life.”
Sex and Spiritual Energy
Sex has a very definite effect on our lives and our auras. Of course, we all
know that sex serves the critical function of perpetuating the species and
that it’s part of the attraction that brings people together. We also know that
every human entering puberty experiences sexual feelings and that we all
have these urges and sensations within us regardless of how we express
them. The question in metaphysics is not whether our sexuality should be a
part of our spiritual life, but rather how our sexuality should be a part of our
spiritual life.
In the aura, sexual energy emanates from the root chakra. The root
chakra operates a little differently from the other centers when it comes to
how its energy moves. In the four main centers that we have been working
with, energy is in a constant state of receiving and transmitting. The root
chakra does not function this way. The root chakra already has within it a
special reservoir of power. The spiritual power within this center has been
placed there as part of our spiritual design to serve a very specific function.
This function is something we’ve been doing for eons in various forms. It’s
something that’s an intimate part of our life and character. The energy of the
root chakra gives us the power to create. It’s not the actual creation,
inspiration, or act, but the power, drive, and spiritual force necessary to put
the creative energies into action and carry them to fruition.
The root chakra energy has been given to you as part of your spiritual
heritage. How you use this creative energy determines its effectiveness in
your life. This energy flows in one of three ways:
1. Generation.
2. Degeneration.
3. Regeneration.
Generation uses the root chakra energy for creating offspring. This root
energy is necessary for the conception of children. Without it, conception

could not take place because in addition to the physical union of egg and
sperm, there is a spiritual connection that occurs as well. The power to
procreate cannot be underestimated. The ability to reproduce is one of the
most holy traits you possess, whether you choose to bear children or not.
Normal sexual activity without the goal of having children may also fall
under the category of generation. This is because it still mirrors the
procreative process even if the act doesn’t result in the conception of a
child. In this form, the procreative energy becomes purely sexual because
the root chakra energy is used primarily for pleasure and intimacy. The
energy is not quite as bright as in the act of procreation, but it’s still an
elevating energy if the sexual activity is done out of genuine love and
affection. This sexual interaction is part of the bonding and strengthening
process that can bring two people closer together.
Degeneration is the wasting of root chakra energy through the
intentional or unintentional misuse of that creative force. We misuse the
root chakra energy through heavy excesses and distortions of sex. When we
indulge in these practices, we may find them momentarily enjoyable, but
they’re serving no useful purpose. Perversions and deviate acts can result in
degeneration of root chakra energy. We have to be very careful, because
degeneration is a form of devolution. If individuals are determined and
persistent in acting out degrading sex, it’s going to distance themselves
more and more from their spiritual nature. In this situation, the root energy
doesn’t dissipate, but it becomes dirtied and defiled.
Regeneration means using the root chakra energy for purely creative
endeavors. We see this in people who refrain from sex before a big event
and artists who abstain during creative periods. You need this power for all
creative and productive endeavors. Without it, you could not create,
whether it’s to design a building, sing a song, or paint a picture. It’s the
power behind great artists, inventors, musicians, etc. It gives us the energy,
stamina, and drive necessary to create something new and original.
You can also direct root chakra energy for purely spiritual purposes.
One of the greatest creative acts is your own metamorphosis from human
consciousness to the realization of a fully matured divine being. This
creative act will require a strong regenerative flow of the root chakra
energy. Here’s where the concept of celibacy comes in. For those who are
aiming to reach the pinnacle of spiritual development, there is an eventual
need for sexual abstention, so that the spiritual power can be completely

directed to the spiritual goal. Such a sacrifice, however, is not necessary
until a soul reaches the advanced stages of spiritual development, and even
then there are exceptions. To take a vow of celibacy before one has properly
developed can create problems. You can end up repressing normal desires,
which is not healthy. The point is, you don’t have to stop having sex to
develop spiritually, but you do have to control your sexual activity.
When the root energy is in the generative mode, the energy in the aura
beams upward from the root center. (See Illustration 11.4A.) It usually
extends to the level of the emotional center in a carnation red color. If the
person is trying to conceive children, the color will be a very bright red with
white light around it. It’s a vital, beautiful energy to see. If the person is
simply in a romantic relationship, there will be only the red energy moving
upward, and it won’t be as bright. If the person is a little too intoxicated by
sex, the energy will still move upward, but the red can be dirtied and dulled
to maroon red. On the other hand, if the person is in a strong degenerative
mode, the root energy now moves in a downward motion, sometimes
reaching below the feet—indicative of a devolving consciousness. (See
Illustration 11.4D.) The energy is deep, vitiated red.
What’s beautiful to see is the light moving in a regenerative flow. If the
person is in a high creative mode, the root energy can move all the way up
to the mental body, giving it tremendous energy and power. (See Illustration
11.4B.) This helps to regenerate and replenish the brain cells and can make
you look and feel young. It’s one of the reasons so many productive and
creative people have youthful vitality and stamina. If you find yourself
confused, or uninspired, one of the best ways to get on target is to start (or
resume) being productive and creative. It renews and revivifies the whole
landscape of your thinking. In the case of the spiritual master who has
directed all his or her energy to spiritual purposes, the root energy will
move up beyond the head and into the Higher Self Point. (See Illustration
11.4C.)
Most of our problems with sex come from a misunderstanding and
misuse of this energy. Instead of using the creative power of sex to its
fullest potential, we limit its power, squandering its vitality to no particular
end. We do this mainly out of ignorance. If you are unhappy in your sex
life, first look to see if you are placing too much emphasis on sex. The truth
is, when the sexual energy is balanced, it will not be such a preoccupation.
Sex will feel like a natural part of life. Oversexed people are almost always

expressing an unbalanced energy. These people end up feeling dissatisfied,
even after they’ve had their sexual conquests, because the energy’s not
balanced. People who have balanced the sexual energy with all other
aspects of life enjoy sex, but it’s not an issue with them. The truth is, as you
climb the spiritual ladder, there will be less and less desire for sex because
more of your root energy will be flowing into creative and spiritual
avenues. Working with the Divine Light in this center will help to clear and
cleanse misused energies and get the whole flow moving the way it should.
Most importantly, it will help to elevate and spiritualize the root center.
The following prayer may be used before sex to put the Divine Light into
the act of making love to raise its vibration. Ideally, it’s best if both partners
say this prayer together.
Meditative Prayer to Uplift the Sex Act
“Down-ray the pure white light into my root chakra and sexual organs to
uplift and elevate this sexual act into an expression of Thy light and love.”
Regardless of where you are, you want to begin the process of
spiritualizing and rarefying the sexual vibration. By getting a handle on this
part of your nature, you’re harnessing one of the most potent forces in you.
I recommend using the orange-red flame to help cleanse and clear any dark
energies.

Root Chakra Energy : ILLUSTRATION 11.4
Meditative Prayer to Purify the Root Chakra
“Down-ray the orange-red flame of purification into my root chakra to
purify all depleted and defiled sexual energies. Cleanse all black and gray
atoms and impurities, taking them to the mineral kingdom to be dissolved in
the light.”

Although you can’t extinguish the power of the root chakra no matter
how you may misuse it, you can deplete its potency. The blue-white fire can
help to quicken the regenerating process, so it’s still necessary to use this
energy following the purification.
Meditative Prayer to Replenish the Root Chakra
“Down-ray the blue-white fire into my root chakra to charge and recharge
all depleted and exhausted areas with new spiritual energy and vitality.”
You can also use the emerald green to balance the flow in your root
chakra, which will help to get the energy moving in the direction it needs to.
In closing, my advice is to use the sex act sparingly. When you do have sex,
do it with good intentions. Care for and love the person you’re being
intimate with. The physical act of love is the closest two auras can get. Not
only do you affect your root chakra flow, you draw energy from the other
person’s aura. So you want to be careful that your partner is coming from a
place of love. Respect this sacred energy God has given you, and it will
serve you better than you can imagine.
The Sacrament of Marriage
Marriage is designed to assist human souls in their spiritual evolution. It’s
part of the spiritual plan. Regardless if the goal is to bear children, through
love, respect, fidelity, and sacrifice, the couple learns to serve God. One
reflects the other: loyalty in marriage demonstrates loyalty to God.
Many intelligent people question the need for marriage, especially when
there is no intention of having children. They ask why, if two people love
each other, is it essential for them to marry? Spiritually, marriage is not just
about two people in love. It’s about two people and God. We can’t take God
out of the equation. When we sign that marriage license, we’re signing part
of ourselves as well. We’re making a commitment. We can’t escape that it’s
like any legal document. When a student graduates from school, he or she
gets a degree. When a medical student becomes a doctor, he or she is

bestowed the honor of M.D. and obtains a license to practice. The same is
true of marriage. So, the challenge of marriage is not in the design but in
our ability to live up to that design.
When you marry, you’re giving part of yourself—part of your human
self. The divine always remains its own, but each of us does give of our
human self. Many people are afraid of this sacrifice. They fear that it will
stifle their creativity, that they will lose their identity in this union called
marriage. Look at the stereotype of married life as “the old ball and chain.”
Those who have gone through a stifling or harsh marital experience will
often say, “No more!” Their fears are understandable, but they are just that
—fears. The truth is, you are in the process of surrendering your human self
to your divine self. That’s the whole point of spiritual evolution. Day by
day, you are dropping a little of your old self to pick up your true self. Any
opportunity to drop some of the human opens you up to more of the divine.
If you do right by the marriage, you’re not restricting yourself at all. Quite
the contrary. You’re opening your creative flow to new heights and
expanding your identity to new dimensions. On top of that, you’re forming
a support system that’s unbeatable. And the auric exchange between strong
marriage partners is a great enhancement to life.
Marriage born of true love brings a wonderful blessing from the Higher
Self. Not only is there a physical and legal marriage—there is a spiritual
marriage as well. Spiritual marriage can be seen in the aura as a thread of
pink light connecting the spouses at the emerald hub within the Hermetic
center. This thread is the spiritual blessing of the divine, and it’s created
when there is true love and earnest commitment between a man and
woman. Such spiritual connection is essential because it keeps the love flow
going. It unites at the Hermetic center because that is where this
commitment is made in the human Earth affairs. However, it does not affect
the soul levels. Even in marriage, each partner is still on his or her own
evolutionary ladder. The marriage becomes part of the learning experience
but each is still a spiritual individual. This spiritual bond is created only in
the sacrament of marriage. The marriage can take place civilly, in a church,
or wherever, but must take place legally. And it must be done out of love. If
you date someone, live with someone you love dearly, even have children
with that person out of wedlock, you may have a beautiful exchange of
energy, but this special, sacramental bond will be lacking. It’s a spiritual

blessing that stays with the couple throughout married life until death or
divorce.
There are just as many ways to work with the light in marriage as there
are spiritual traits to develop—harmony, fidelity, loyalty, understanding,
gentleness, patience, adaptability, commitment…the list goes on. If there’s a
problem in your marriage, you must do everything in your power to remedy
it. Call on all your divine tools, everything in your possession, to turn things
around.
Meditative Prayer for Spiritual Harmony within Couples
“Down-ray the emerald green ray of balance and the deep rose pink ray of
spiritual love into all levels of my consciousness, restoring and
reestablishing mindbody-soul harmony between (name person) and me.
May (name person) also receive this mind-body-soul harmony at all levels
of consciousness and may this light strengthen our marital bond in the fires
of Thy light and everlasting love for the good of all concerned.”
To Forgive Is Divine
Forgiveness is essential in healing any relationship. In your relationships,
you’re bound to step on each other’s toes at one point or another. You’re not
perfected yet, so you’re inevitably going to make mistakes. As a result,
there’ll be times when you’ll need to ask forgiveness, or be forgiving.
Forgiveness is an essential skill to develop in your spiritual unfoldment.
It’s not always easy for people to ask for forgiveness or to forgive. The
human ego gets involved and wants to hold on to its anger, grudges, and so
on. On the one hand, you may not recognize or want to recognize that you
have done anything wrong to warrant asking someone’s forgiveness. On the
other hand, it may be doubly hard for you to forgive others for wrongs
done, especially if they are serious. There are people who have gone to their
graves without forgiving the people who injured them.
Perhaps what makes the act of forgiveness so difficult is the mistaken
notion that if you forgive someone, you’re letting him or her off the hook.

In truth, when you forgive someone you’re letting yourself off the hook.
There’s freedom in forgiveness. When you forgive, you’re cleansing
yourself of your own negative reactive energy associated to the wrong done
to you, perceived or real. The other person will still have to work out his or
her own negative actions, but you are freeing yourself of any connection to
that energy, and that is a very liberating experience.
There’s a well-known story of a woman who endured the Nazi
concentration camps of World War II. She survived the experience but had
been misused by one jailer in particular. The woman became very religious,
which helped release many of the horrible memories she carried. She did
her best to practice forgiveness and live a godly life. Years later, she was at
a public function when she spotted the guard who had abused her. Upon
seeing him, the memories of the abuse returned and her initial reaction was
to walk over and kill him right then and there. Fortunately, her religious
convictions took hold of her. She realized that this was her opportunity to
apply all the spiritual principles she had learned over the years. With all the
strength she had, she walked over to the astonished man (who recognized
her) and told him point-blank that she forgave him for all the things he had
done to her. She said it sincerely and with conviction. To her amazement,
after truly forgiving him, the first thing she felt was relief. For the first time
since the whole ordeal, she felt a deep sense of peace and that this was past
her. She had truly let it go from her life.
Did her actions free this man from his offenses? Of course not. He still
had a great deal of work to do to redeem his soul for all his misdeeds. But
she was now free of him, and, in the process, she had helped him along his
road to redemption. There is enormous power in the act of forgiveness.
If you commit an offense to someone, you need to ask forgiveness, and
do it quickly. This needs to be done in deed as well as in word. There is no
need to condemn yourself. Just take action to correct whatever it is you did.
Take responsibility for your actions. Remember, there is no sin past
redemption. God always gives us a second chance. One of the greatest
stories of God’s forgiveness is the life of Saul, who became known as Saint
Paul. Saul, as we know, was a persecutor of the early Christians. Locked
into his own religious traditions, he felt that the budding Christian faith was
a threat to his system of belief. He was persistent and cruel in his systematic
attacks on the early Christians, killing many. Yet this very man, after his
spiritual awakening on the road to Damascus, became one of Christianity’s

greatest exponents. Through his redemption, God imbued him with great
spiritual power and authority. No one is immune to times of weakness.
There’s a saying that even the angels have to be reprimanded every once in
a great while!
The Forgiveness Principles
In working with forgiveness, keep in mind these three fundamental
principles. They will take you a long way toward success in your
forgiveness work.
1. Forgive quickly. Try to forgive or ask forgiveness as soon after the
incident as possible. If anger or resentment has time to seep into the
consciousness and aura, it gains momentum and is harder to eliminate.
2. Forgive and forget. Someone may have done a hundred good things,
but what do many often remember about him or her the most? It’s that
one rotten thing he or she did. That’s human nature. Learn to forgive
and forget. If you say you forgive, but constantly dredge up mistakes
from the past, you haven’t really forgiven. You must forgive from your
heart and truly mean it to let it go.
3. Forgive “seventy times seven” times. Many times mistakes will be
repeated. If you’re in the process of learning an important life lesson,
but it still hasn’t quite “sunk in,” you’re going to repeatedly make the
same mistake, sometimes hurting the same person, until that lesson is
completely understood. This is why it is said you must forgive not
once, not seven times, but “seventy times seven” times. There can be
no limit to forgiveness. You must continue to be supportive of your
forgiveness. You can’t say, “I’ll forgive you this time, but if you do it
again, I’ll never forgive you.” That’s the same as not forgiving.
The Forgiveness Prayer
In this prayer, included are both forgiving and asking forgiveness. This
reciprocal activity is important because from the human point of view, it’s
hard to be sensitive to the full range and interplay of energies that created a
wrongful action. It might be very obvious that someone did wrong to you

and that you need to forgive that person. Yet, there may also have been
something you did that contributed to this person’s acting the way he or she
did. By returning the forgiving act, you’re ensuring your spiritual release.
Once again, the key energy to work with is the deep rose pink ray.
Meditate with this energy before doing your actual forgiveness work to
bring more love and compassion to yourself. Feel the uplifting quality of
this energy. If the wrong was serious, include meditating with the pure
white light as well to redeem the defiled energies.
Get into your Higher Self Point and begin the forgiveness prayer. In this
case, you’re not working with a particular light ray, although you can use
the love ray if you want. You’re working primarily with your Higher Self.
Forgiveness Prayer
“I ask forgiveness for anything I may have done that injured you in word,
thought, act, or deed, knowingly and unknowingly.
“And I forgive you for anything that you may have done to me that injured
me in word, thought, act, or deed, knowingly and unknowingly.
“I ask that all these negative energies be dissolved in the holy fires of
eternal love, freeing us completely in God’s Divine Light and everlasting
peace.”
Notice the words “knowingly and unknowingly.” Many times you can
hurt people or are hurt by others unknowingly. Since you’re not always
fully conscious of your motives and actions, you need to include the
unconsciousness factor. Fortunately, one of the magnificent things about
working with spiritual energy is that it gently brings more of your
unconscious thoughts, words, and actions to conscious light, so that you can
do something about them.
In addition to your forgiveness prayers and light work, as the situation
warrants it, confront the person face-to-face. You can repeat this prayer as
often as you feel the need. If you wish to forgive or ask forgiveness of

someone who has passed on, you can still use this prayer. Remember, the
soul of that person is still very much alive, and your prayer and light reach
them wherever they are.


CHAPTER 12
LIVING IN SPIRITUAL RHYTHM
YOUR AURA IS not only the first place you make changes; it is the first place
you set the rhythms of your life. One of the most fascinating features of the
aura is its motion. Because your aura vibrates, its colorful energies move in
various rhythmic flows. When your aura is in harmony, your life moves in
spiritual rhythm. When there is discord in you, these auric rhythms are
disturbed, which can weaken or compromise the spiritual power you can
employ. When the aura is out of rhythm, you can feel lost and engulfed by
concerns and uncertainties. How do you keep your spiritual equilibrium
when the activities of life—and your own internal struggles—seem to pull
you in different directions at the same time? In this chapter, we will explore
ways to strengthen the rhythms of your aura and the effects those rhythms
have in your life.
We all know how hectic life can get. It can feel like your life is running
you rather than you are running your life. The key to a productive life is
balance, where the different activities are working in harmony with each
other. In the body, we call this homeostasis. When the body is in harmony,
the systems are in equilibrium and health is maintained. If that harmony is
compromised, a host of illnesses and physical distresses can ensue. Life has
a spiritual rhythm, but many times we don’t live in that rhythm. We live in
our own rhythm and fall out of step with the divine pulsebeat. This is all
reflected in the aura.
The rhythmic patterns of the aura are varied, yet all are meant to work
in synchronicity. Like hands on a classic timepiece, the second hand,
minute hand, and hour hand all move at different tempos, yet together they
tell you the time. The movements and fluctuations in the aura reflect
different aspects of our life expression. Some aspects of the aura change
quickly with our changing thoughts, words and emotions and reflect

immediate dynamics we are confronting and expressing. Other aspects of
our aura change slowly over time, and this reflects longer-range dynamics
that we are developing and expressing.
The first step in keeping the different rhythmic energies of the aura in
coordination is to realize that while you have control over your aura, you
must exercise that control. When faced with successes or failures, your
reaction to external events determines if you’re going to stay balanced and
take things in stride or if these experiences throw off your aura and
consciousness. There are internal dynamics as well. You may be dealing
with issues of the past that are haunting you even as external conditions are
good. These internal struggles can make it difficult to function effectively
and will affect the auric rhythmic flow. Also, we can stagnate when we
don’t participate in activities as we should. Life is always in motion, and it’s
our job to keep step with that motion. To hesitate at times we should take
action slows down our life and disturbs the auric flow. Once that
momentum is lost, it can be difficult to regain, but regain it we must.
In general, enlightened energies are radiant and uplifting and have a
beautiful flow to them, whereas unenlightened energies are not only ugly
and debilitating but can have a chaotic, disorienting motion that can throw
off our spiritual pacing.
The Motion of the Chakras
With the exception of the crown chakra, the energy centers spin on an axis.
They spin clockwise when healthy (see Chapter 5), yet they don’t all spin at
the same rate of speed. For example, the mental center spins faster than the
emotional center. We tend to process ideas faster than we emotionally
embrace those ideas. As you strengthen the mind and incorporate new ideas
into your consciousness, be patient with your emotions. It may take a little
longer to emotionally embrace those new ideas because the emotional
nature moves at a different pace than the mind.
The rate of spin within a chakra can also vary. For example, while the
mental center spins fastest, the rate of that spin can slow down a little when
we are stubborn, inflexible, hard-headed, or slow to accept inspiration. This
will affect the power we can contain in the mind. This change in rate of spin
can happen with any of the chakras. It becomes even more clear why Step 3

in Higher Self Meditation, “Check Your Spiritual Centers,” is so important.
It not only makes sure we receive the energy accurately; it helps set the
rhythmic tone of our meditation.
Here is a meditative prayer to create harmony among the four key
chakras. In terms of building harmony in the aura, you will be working a
great deal with the emerald green ray—the spiritual balancer of life.
Meditative Prayer for Chakra Harmony with the Emerald Green Ray
“Down-ray the emerald green ray of balance and harmony in my four main
chakras—mental, throat, Hermetic and emotional—to steady the centers
and bring them into rhythmic harmony within themselves and in relation to
each other.”
Chakra Radiations and Their Rhythms
In Chapter 2, we looked at the different types of spiritual energies that
radiate from the chakras. I would like to focus on two of these flows in
more detail: active emanations and fanning rays.
Active emanations are perhaps the part of the aura that change the
fastest. These fluctuations reflect how you are interacting with things going
on with you in the moment. For example, you may be in a loving place, but
someone says something that upsets you and you get angry. Those active
emanations can quickly move from deep-rose-pink to vitiated red, and you
will feel it. Your mood will change. When you calm down and center
yourself, those active emanations change to an emerald green, showing the
steadying of the center, or back to the loving pink ray.
Fanning rays are radiating from the same spiritual center as the active
emanations but look and work quite differently. These are the more
dominant energy flows in the mental, Hermetic and emotional centers. They
show a tendency of one’s consciousness and change slowly. For example, a
blue fanning ray radiating from the mental center shows a determined
person. This person is single-minded in a good way, not easily seduced or
pulled off course by the impressions of others. They may be excited by a
project they are working on and have put a lot of time and energy into. As

they direct their mental energy into that project, they may have a bright
orange active emanation in addition to the blue fanning ray. This is a
powerful combination as it indicates this person is diligent in pursuing their
ideas. Both rhythmic flows radiating from the chakra are different but in
harmony, which will lead to productive results.
But let’s say something comes along to challenge that harmony. Maybe
the project they have worked on for so long has a setback. Depending on
their reaction, the person could fall into fear that the entire project might
fail. In that case, the active emanations could switch from bright orange to
gray, indicating a shift from excitement and motivation to fear and worry.
Yet the blue fanning ray will remain blue. So while a distressing situation
came up, the mental focus is still there, and this energy will be needed to
help turn things around. Perhaps this person shows a lot of determination to
find another solution; they don’t give up even though they are worried. If
they stick with it, the strong fanning ray will help them work through their
anxiety and turn the color of the active emanation around.
However, if their fear and worry become consuming, they will focus on
how things are going wrong instead of thinking about how to solve the
problem. This negative energy will build momentum. If persistent, this
worry can weaken their determination and the color of the fanning ray can
eventually change to grey. Now, the energetic orientation has switched. Fear
is the dominant energy and a stronger effort will be needed to turn things
around.
In this example we see two different rhythmic auric flows either
working together or in disharmony. In one scenario, if the distress is caught
soon enough, the energy can move back to a positive flow that restores
harmony to the aura. If worry takes over, it can eventually darken the
energy flow of the fanning rays, which means a deeper auric rhythmic pulse
has been adversely affected. Not only will you feel this, but the feeling will
not go away quickly. Plus, this disturbing momentum can compound,
affecting more than one energy center. While things can be going well in
other areas of life, the anxiety can spill into those other areas and create
more distress, like a fire that spreads beyond the area in which it started.
Nothing can enter your aura unless you permit it. If life throws you a
curve ball, keep your equilibrium even if answers are not immediately
forthcoming. Do all you can to avoid knee-jerk reactions that will affect
your aura and invite disturbing energies. It takes power to maintain spiritual

equilibrium and to walk in divine rhythm. Through your meditations with
Divine Light, you will keep building more spiritual power in your aura
which will sustain you. Then, you will be coming from the centered place,
better able to handle the things being presented to you. You will move in
God’s rhythm.
Here is a meditative prayer directed to strengthen the various spiritual
energies flowing from the chakras.
Meditation with the Lemon Yellow Ray to Strengthen the Active
Emanations and Fanning Rays
“Down-ray the lemon yellow ray of concentration to the chakras within my
aura to strengthen the rhythmic flows of my fanning rays and active
emanations so they are working in divine harmony with each other. Free me
from any disturbances so that the chakras are steady and strong.”
Auric Compartments and Rhythmic Life Flows
The auric compartments of the aura are some of the most gradual to develop
(see Chapter 2). They reflect changes in our consciousness over the course
of our lifetime. In addition to our day-to-day dramas, there are themes and
character traits that we exhibit and work to improve over time. These are
qualities of the soul that take time to mature. For example, we may notice
that we are impatient. Even though we may be aware that this is something
to change, it can take years—even decades—of effort to truly transform it.
One of the greatest joys of a life well-lived is how much we have developed
our talents and character. There is an emotional, mental and spiritual
maturity that brings tremendous satisfaction and is a blessing to those
around us.
This, too, is a rhythmic flow in the aura but at a very different pace than
either the active emanations or the fanning rays. Because we are immersed
in the auric compartments of the aura we live in, they play a foundational
part in maintaining spiritual rhythm. Depending on how bright the

compartments are, they reflect how well we are living the spiritual
attributes that we are developing.
When first developing spiritual attributes, a primary place these powers
show up is in the chakras. As you consistently live the spiritual powers in
the chakras, they start to establish their presence in the compartments. This
indicates that the soul is living the spiritual truths it is learning. Some of
these compartments will be bright and strong, indicating you are maturing
and gaining wisdom in certain parts of your life. Other compartments may
be darker, undeveloped or corrupted. This means the soul, in that area, is
either doing things that are contrary to spiritual law or that the compartment
is an undeveloped part of one’s consciousness.
As the soul fully internalizes the attributes and life lessons associated
with the compartments, those life lessons become wisdom and those
attributes become part of the immortal expression. It is one of the most
beautiful moments in the growth of the soul when enlightened
compartments of the aura become part of the soul expression.
The compartments also support experiences and energies that are
coming into the auric field but have not yet shown themselves in physical
life. This, too, affects our spiritual rhythm. Let’s say you are about to meet
the love of your life. The energy of that life-changing event can show up
first in the auric compartments. This indicates that the energy of this
interaction is starting to reach the aura, but that the experience hasn’t
happened yet. This helps prepare the person energetically. That way, when
the experience presents itself, the soul is more ready to pay attention and
recognize what is happening.
We can’t ask the Divine Light to uplift the compartments directly. What
we can do is ask the Divine Light to open up our receptivity to the power
within them and pay more attention to the long-term rhythms of our life.
Meditation to Strengthen the Rhythmic Connection with the
Compartments of the Aura
“Down-ray the golden ray of wisdom light to the compartments of my auric
field. I ask this Divine Light to strengthen this part of my aura so I may
better align with the long-term rhythms of my life. I ask this golden light to

help me better pace myself through the seasons of life and the stages of my
spiritual unfoldment.”
Pacing Your Meditations
In organizing your meditations, take into account the rhythmic flows of
your aura and life dynamics. As emphasized earlier, it’s important to
meditate daily as this builds spiritual momentum and accelerates changes in
the aura. In following Key 1 of the meditation practice when working with
spiritual energy (“Decide what you want the Light to do for you”), there
will be times when you focus on things of immediate concern and other
times when you want to focus on longer-range goals and aspirations. Here
are a few meditative guidelines in working with both of these dynamics.
Dealing with Immediate Issues
Meditating with Divine Light is effective in helping to navigate dynamic
situations that are right in front of you. When something come up that
throws you off, the quicker you turn it around, the better. As the expression
goes, “Nip it in the bud.” If a seedling is growing in an unwanted place in
your garden, it’s much easier to uproot it as a seedling before it becomes a
tree. Here is a meditative prayer to put your attention on immediate issues
before they become bigger! (You can also use any of the meditative prayers
in this book to support this process.)
Meditative Prayer with the Silver Ray for Quick Response
“Down-ray the silver ray of divine intelligence into my Hermetic Center to
quicken my response to current life dynamics. May this silver light guide
my steps so I may take care of any present concerns immediately and
without delay.”

If you unexpectedly face outside energies that are not in alignment with
your spiritual rhythm and are throwing you off, here is a meditative prayer
to help:
Meditative Prayer When Faced with Energies not in Alignment with the
Spiritual Rhythm
“Down-ray the purple ray of spiritual peace to surround my aura in the
peace of spirit and keep me centered in my divine oneness. I ask the
emerald green ray of balance to be directed into my emotional center to
keep me emotionally centered. I refuse to accept any unbalanced or
unhealthy energies into my aura.”
Remember that no adverse energy can enter your auric field unless you
permit that to happen. You have the divine right to maintain your spiritual
equilibrium when challenged. When faced with someone or something that
wants to pull you out of your spiritual rhythm, reassert your divine right to
be in harmony. At the same time, express compassion for others and where
they are in their life regardless of what they show you. You cannot judge
another person’s actions or reasons for doing what they do. You are only
responsible for your own actions and intentions. Many times, we fall out of
spiritual rhythm because there is something we want and we are willing to
step out of spiritual alignment to get it. When you feel you are out of
alignment, check your motives for the things you are doing.
Long-Term Goals
We all have unfinished business to take care of. This can include character
flaws to strengthen, talents to develop, and unpleasant experiences of the
past to overcome. It is unlikely that these things will change overnight; it
will take persistent effort. This doesn’t mean we have to work on these
things during every meditation; we just need to pace ourselves over time to
turn them around. These long-range projects are reflected in the slower
rhythms of the aura. They need sustained attention. In the same way you

train for years in your profession to excel, you may work on facets of your
aura for years to improve certain aspects of your personality.
It’s a good idea to keep an ongoing journal of your long-range
meditation work to keep track of your progress. For example, if anger is an
issue, work daily with the energies offered in this book for a couple of
weeks or until you see the energy shift in this area. If you start to see a
change or have established the energy flow you seek, let that issue go for a
while and move onto other areas in your meditations. Later, if the pattern
pops up again, start meditating with the light to get to the root of what is
bothering you. You may decide to keep your attention on this issue for a
while. Gradually, you will see a positive change in your nature. You’ll be
stronger and steadier and you won’t be as reactive as you once were.
The key with long-range projects is persistence and patience. You need
to be patient with how much time it may take to experience a change yet
persistent enough to see it through. Here is a meditative prayer to help build
the qualities of patience and persistence, especially in times when we feel
discouraged or that we won’t succeed:
Meditative Prayer for Patience and Persistence
“Down-ray the emerald green ray of balance to surround my aura in divine
harmony so that I relax and let my life unfold in divine rhythm and
patience. Guide me to better recognize when I must take action and when to
hold steady. I know my good will unfold in divine time.”


PART IV
The Aura and Your Mystical Nature


CHAPTER 13
DIVINE DIRECTION AND GUIDANCE
SOMETIMES WE GET STUCK in life’s activities. Like a lesson in school we can’t
seem to master, there are some situations that we simply don’t know how to
handle. You may have a career decision to make or a personal issue you
need to address, and clarity as to the best course of action is eluding you. It
is these times you can call on the divine to request help. Remember, you are
not pursuing the spiritual life on your own; the divine is supporting you
every step of the way. You have to do your own experiencing and spiritual
growing, but in those pursuits, we cooperate with the divine. There is such
beauty and solace in this knowing because it makes us understand that we
are part of the greater life regardless of what is going on with us. And even
though we may not have all the answers, we know there is a divine solution
to every problem.
While pursuing our goals and aspirations, we receive help from an
extraordinary aspect of the spiritual life—rightful direction and divine
guidance. Direction and guidance are complementary but different spiritual
tools. Rightful direction means knowing the right road to take that will keep
you aligned with your higher purpose. Perhaps you’re trying to find your
career path, or deciding if you are going to marry the person you are dating,
or contemplating whether to have children. Maybe you simply want to
change your life in some way but are unclear where to start. In all of these
situations, you can greatly benefit from working with rightful direction.
Right direction is connected with your destiny here on Earth. Each of us
is ideally suited to accomplishing certain things in life. Intuitively, you
already know what that purpose is, but as can happen too easily, you may
become distracted and confused to the point that you lose your way. By
tuning into right direction, you are tuning into the energy of your spiritual
purpose, the part you are playing in the divine plan of life.

Divine guidance brings in a different aspect of the divine life. It helps
you navigate through life’s twists and turns once you know your direction.
For example, say you have decided to pursue a career in business. Divine
guidance will help steer you through those waters to be successful in your
aspirations. So call on right direction when you are trying to find your way,
and then work with divine guidance to help keep you on the right path
despite any bumps or obstacles.
An essential part of your spiritual growth entails learning how to work
with spiritual energy to help guide and direct your life. The key is to
actively call on the light for help, and then to use the inspiration given. You
are inspired every day by the divine but may not always pay attention to the
signals. Many times the inspiration coming in may not be what you expect
or wish it to be even though it’s in your best interests.
A common misunderstanding when it comes to guidance and direction
is relying on the divine to do all the spiritual work for you. Too many
people say things like, “God, tell me what to do and I’ll do it.” Remember,
the light is not meant to bypass the normal growth process. To really
connect with divine guidance and direction, you need to be committed to
self-discovery. The light won’t “tell you” what to do; it will illuminate the
way so you can see for yourself what to do. As the conduit of higher
consciousness, the Divine Light uplifts your awareness so you can see more
often through the eyes of spirit.
Many people when they come for an aura consultation want me to
essentially tell them what to do. They figure that with clairvoyant insight all
I have to do is say “Do this or that” and the problem is solved. But that’s
not how it works. Certainly, I share my clairvoyant insights, but no one can
or should make a decision for another soul. We have to do our own
growing. Each of us needs to discover life’s answers for ourselves if they
are to have meaning. Ironically, the times where direction was given very
clearly as a tool of encouragement, the person most often didn’t follow
through on the inspiration. Why? Because there was no self-discovery. The
inspiration didn’t come from them. As you work with guidance and
direction, it can sometimes take time to make that discovery. But that time
is well spent. Don’t be discouraged. Keep calling on the light for help and
you will make those genuine moments of divine awareness.
In the aura, there are several spiritual energies connected to direction
and guidance. If gold is strongly seen in the aura, it shows a decisive person

who is outgoing and willing to take chances. Such people have learned from
their experiences and become the wiser for it. They are usually clear in their
direction. When silver is strongly seen in the aura, especially if it is seen in
the heart chakra, this indicates a quick, perceptive person who is following
through on the guidance and direction that is being given. White light seen
in the aura indicates high spiritual power, a visionary person. This soul is
very in tune with the divine. He or she does not get caught up in petty
things or distractions and can see the greater perspective.
The skills of being divinely directed and guided can be strengthened
only through use. You have to develop your character to be in alignment
with your higher purpose. To effectively connect with divine guidance and
direction, cultivate a receptive, dynamic nature. Be a person who is willing
to take a risk on something that you intuitively know is worthwhile. Even if
mistakes and failures happen, take personal responsibility and learn from
those mistakes.
As always, meditation is the master key to tuning into the Higher Self.
Go into the silence, the oneness of life. Tune into your own higher nature to
hear what the mystics call “the still, small voice within.” With practice and
sincere intention, you can build an intimate relationship with the Higher
Self that will bless all facets of your life.
Becoming Receptive to Inspiration
Your Higher Self Point plays a crucial role in connecting you with guidance
and direction. In addition to acting as intermediary for the spiritual light, the
Higher Self is the emissary for inspiration from the divine. The Higher Self
sees the bigger picture of your Earth life, and part of its job is to help steer
you in your life’s journey. As inspiration flows from the divine, it makes a
strong connection with your Higher Self, which then “translates” this
inspiration into a form you can understand and use. To receive guidance or
direction, it helps to be clear about what you need help with. When you’re
in the throes of an important decision, you can lose sight of the real issue.
So take a moment to reflect on what you want the light to do for you, and
formulate that thought into a sentence or question.
Once you’ve been able to more clearly define the problem or dilemma,
let it go from your conscious mind. Free your thoughts and emotions and

leave room for the light to inspire you. You want to switch your conscious
brain/mind thinking to a receiving mode rather than a sending mode. In this
receiving mode, your conscious mind listens to the spirit. Of course, do
your part in evaluating a situation or in making a choice, but when ready to
open to the divine, let the concern go. Put it on “the altar of God.” Too
many try to solve a problem by being immersed in the problem. The answer
comes by being immersed in the divine, where the divine solution appears.
Begin your work by relaxing. In this relaxing there is a trust, a knowing,
that you are putting things into God’s hands. With this trust comes a belief
in the unlimited capacity and readiness of the Higher Power to help you. As
the biblical saying goes, “Ask, believing.” There is great power in belief. In
believing, you know there is an answer even if you can’t see that answer
yet. You’re not challenging God. You’re opening to God. You’re saying,
“God, I know You know the answer. I open myself up to receiving that
answer.” There has to be open-mindedness and open-heartedness on your
part for this whole process to work. If you’re assuming a doubting or
challenging attitude, essentially telling God to “prove it,” all you’re doing is
blocking the very flow you’re trying to open.
Letting go of your problems can be more difficult than it seems.
Chances are, a perplexing concern may be still “hanging in there” simply
because you yourself have been holding on to it, and not letting your higher
nature work with you. Your answer could be staring you right in the face,
with you refusing to see it. The issue is not the spirit connecting with you,
but you connecting with the spirit.
Some people resist the idea of being helped altogether. They want to do
it on their own. Of course, there will be times when you must pass through
a trial on your own, no matter how you may pray and call on the light.
However, in most cases, you are meant to make your decision in
cooperation with your higher nature. That’s the whole point. You’re
supposed to be building a bridge between your higher and lower nature.
How can you do that unless you learn to make contact with the Higher Self
through repeated practice?
In the aura, if a person is confused and cannot see clearly, there can be
gray and creamy mustard energies, especially around the head area. Often
people in a confused state will be restless, which can make the energy field
disoriented as well. With such an aura, it’s not surprising that the person is
having difficulties and not able to make decisions. There can be lethargy in

the mental body if the problem has been active for a while. If you feel
confused, begin your meditation by working with the orange-red flame and
the blue-white fire in the mental and emotional areas. They will help to cut
loose that confusion and indecision and create a clearer receiving station for
the divine ideas to make their impression.
When you go to the Higher Self for guidance, make sure you are going
without conditions. When receiving inspiration from the divine you need to
be ready for any answer that might come through. The truth is, many times
the very guidance you receive may not always be what you feel like doing
at the moment. But it’s what’s in your best interests. There was a lady in a
workshop I did on guidance who commented, “I thought if you don’t feel
like doing something, then you’re not supposed to do it!” How wrong!
Certainly pay attention to your emotions, but they do not necessarily know
your higher purpose. They can be too steeped in immediate concerns. You
need to get out of the emotions of the moment and reach up to the Higher
Self Point where the real answers are. In that clarity of consciousness, truth
will come through.
When someone has received the inspirational light, I’ll often see a white
glow around the head area, showing the guidance at work. This is a
temporary situation while the light is doing its job. There will also be active
emanations of violet and light pinks, showing that the Higher Self is trying
to quiet the soul so it can be receptive to the inspiration given.
Connecting with Your Source of Inspiration
Three key energies to call upon for guidance are gold, silver, and white
light. Gold is wonderful for inspiring decisive action. If you’re ambivalent
or allow others to confuse and influence your decisions, the gold can bring
in a dynamic power to straighten things out. The gold is the energy I
personally call upon the most when making important decisions. The gold
gives the power to put inspiration into action.
The silver is excellent for clarity and insight. When things seem
obscure, the silver ray can bring in perception and comprehension. And the
white light is excellent for illumination and revelation. It can lift you out of
present concerns so you are freer and in a more elevated state of mind.

In calling for guidance and direction, raise your consciousness to your
Higher Self Point, and take extra time to really feel the divine presence.
Feel that you are truly on holy ground. In this presence, there is only love,
light, and wisdom. Then when you begin down-raying the Divine Light,
you will be asking that the light down-ray to the Higher Self only. Hold
your attention in your Higher Self Point as you are making your connection
with the light and asking your spiritual question. On its own, the light will
touch into your aura as needed, but again, you want to stay in as high a
level of consciousness as you can while asking for help. By keeping your
attention on the Higher Self Point, you’re making a more direct contact with
your source of inspiration. The actual idea or inspiration will come through
with the light. The Higher Self will quicken this divine idea, so you can
recognize and understand its meaning. Begin by calling on the gold light
with the following meditative prayer.
Meditative Prayer for Divine Guidance and Direction with the Gold
Light
“Down-ray the golden ray of wisdom light to my Higher Self Point of
Spiritual Knowing, bringing forth the pearl of Thy direction and guidance to
reveal that which I need to know, and that which I need to know now,
concerning (name situation). I ask this according to Divine Light and Love
for the good of all concerned.”
Feel the light beaming down into your Higher Self Point, activating it.
Once you feel the connection has been made, ask your question. After you
ask, be still and see if any thoughts come through for you. Keep your mind
as receptive as you can. The inspiration might come as an image or idea.
Generally, you’ll know you’ve hit on something because you’ll feel
exhilaration. Regardless of what does or does not come through, conclude
with the following expression of gratitude.
“I thank Thee that this is so, and I hold to the knowing that my answer
is forthcoming.”
This prayer will help to establish your connection with the answer to
your question, so that at the right time it can reveal itself to you. If you feel
that something is being communicated to you but that the answer is still not
clear, work with the silver ray to quicken your powers of discernment and
comprehension. Again, let it work at your Higher Self Point.

Meditative Prayer for Divine Guidance with the Silver Ray
“Down-ray the silver ray of divine intelligence to my Higher Self Point to
quicken my awareness of this Divine Light and inspiration Thou hast given
me. I ask to be released from all blocks or resistance to my full reception
and comprehension of Thy guidance.”
Accept and Use the Guidance Given
If your answer does not come through during your meditation, it may yet
come to you at any time, according to your receptivity and the timing of the
need. The answer could manifest during contemplation or even in the midst
of an animated conversation. Someone might say something that sparks an
idea. You may not even recognize it as inspiration, but it is.
Many people have asked, “How do I know that the thoughts I may be
getting are truly divine inspirations, rather than just my own thinking?” The
truth is, you won’t fully know until you put that inspiration into action. If it
was your own thinking and not the Higher Self ’s, you will know and be the
better for it, having learned from experience. Next time you go to the
Higher Self, you’ll be that much more astute. If the inspiration was from the
Higher Self and you are following through, then you’ll know that, too, and
will strengthen the connection to the Higher Self.
The Higher Self knows what you’re doing and is going to make every
effort to make that connection work. There will undoubtedly be some trial
and error in this process as you strengthen your connection to the divine.
The voice of the divine has a quality all its own. And with practice,
persistence, and patience, you learn to recognize the divine voice.
Divine guidance isn’t a servant. It’s not going to help you pick the
winner of the sixth race at Santa Anita. Its sole purpose is to guide you in
your spiritual evolution. Sure, it helps with everyday life situations, but its
focus is guidance in activities directly relevant to your growth and purpose
in life. Guidance is not about demanding things of God; it’s about putting
your life into God’s hands. If you’re stepping into this process with the best
of intentions, most ambivalence will clear up.

Often, spiritual guidance will most likely reach you through some type
of prompting. There will be something that will urge you a certain way.
Now that you’re on the lookout for spiritual guidance, you’ll be more
attuned to its prompting. You may be fortunate and make a strong
connection right away in the form of an epiphany or spiritual revelation.
Eventually you could build the connection with your Higher Self to the
point where you are in full conscious awareness, continuously receiving
guidance. Many spiritual initiates, avatars, and saints work from this high
spiritual level and eventually you will build your connection to the direct
level of communion.
Most people connect with spiritual inspiration through what is
commonly called intuition. Intuition and divine guidance walk hand in
hand. So many people tell me they had a feeling they shouldn’t have done
this or that, but then went right ahead and did it anyway. They didn’t trust
their own intuition. They permitted another part of themselves to speak for
them. You must listen to what is said to you—and act on it. Again, divine
guidance doesn’t mollycoddle: the answer you get may not be the one
you’re expecting. And it may not be to your liking. Yet, it will be what’s
best for you and what you need at the moment.
Don’t sweat what comes through. If it feels like you’re on target, try it.
God would never inspire you to do something hurtful or dangerous. If you
get such thoughts, you can be very sure they’re not from God. So when you
get inspiration that feels right, try it out and see what happens. By seeing
your ideas in action, you’ll know right away if your receptivity to divine
inspiration is on target. If it doesn’t work out, you’ll learn how to better
recognize when Divine Light is communicating with you. Be flexible. Even
divine guidance is not set in stone. Life is fluid and things change. But if
you’re in the divine flow, you’ll have no problems that can’t be solved.
In following through on guidance and direction, I’ve found it effective
to ask the light to come down and touch directly into the Hermetic center.
Since the Hermetic center is where you project your energy into action and
outer manifestation, by asking the light to work on the Hermetic level,
you’re making a conscious effort to connect with this active energy and
move it strongly on the Earth plane level. The gold and white light work
equally well in this situation.

Meditative Prayer for Manifesting Direction and Guidance with the Gold
Light
“Down-ray the golden ray of wisdom light to my Hermetic center, bringing
me clear thinking and decisive action concerning (name situation), all in
accordance with Thy divine will and right direction. I ask for the holy
power to manifest Thy divine will and all that is for my highest good.”
You can complete your work with the white light.
Meditative Prayer for Upliftment with the White Light
“Down-ray the pure white light into my Hermetic center and all levels of
my being, lifting my consciousness and illuminating me to see with Thy
spirit eyes, that I may choose the right path for me and follow through and
complete all that I am meant to accomplish.”
Spiritual Illumination
Perhaps you have a problem but can’t pinpoint what it is exactly. The nature
of the problem may elude you altogether. Spiritual illumination can give
you the vision to better understand the nature of the decision to be made.
Spiritual illumination is seeing with spirit eyes. Call on spiritual
illumination when you want to gain a greater understanding or
comprehension of something in general, not necessarily for specific
guidance or direction—although it is excellent for this, too. You may not
have a clear understanding of why there are certain problems in your life.
Spiritual illumination can reveal a greater perspective, which can then give
insight about what to do. The key energy to work with here is the pure
white light.
Meditative Prayer for Spiritual Illumination

“Down-ray the pure white light into my Higher Self Point, lifting me up
into Thy divine consciousness that I may see with Thy spirit eyes,
illuminating and revealing what I need to work on in my life.”
After you’ve made your connection, become still and receptive. There’s
no question to pose here because you’ve simply asked to see what you need
to work on. So be quiet, and let God speak to you. You may get an answer
right away or it may be revealed to you later.


CHAPTER 14
THE AURA AND SPIRITUAL EVOLUTION
A MOST BEAUTIFUL BENEFIT of working with spiritual energy is that it helps to
bring all facets of your life into unity and wholeness. As you ask the light to
help strengthen relationships, guide you with career issues, and address
personal character traits, you are improving the quality of your life and
spiritualizing your aura. As this happens, the soul starts to see the greater
possibilities of life. It starts to realize there is a definite spiritual path to
walk upon. It realizes it has a divine potential, an inner prompting urging it
to the higher life. We call this process of unfolding the soul’s divine
potential our spiritual evolution.
Can you work with the Divine Light directly to help in your personal
spiritual development? Of course; the light is doing that already. Your
“Earth life” and “spiritual life” are part of the same divine life. Everything
going on in your life is an opportunity to learn and grow spiritually. Yet as
you fill your life with more divine power, you will be fanning the desire to
live a more spiritual life. In the beginning when working with the light, you
are using that power to help your present activities and all you are doing.
But as you expand the power in your aura, you will find yourself starting to
adapt your activities to more closely mirror your unfolding spiritual life.
While the Divine Light cannot suddenly bring you to spiritual maturity
and enlightenment, it can help you condition your consciousness to
facilitate your spiritual evolution. Unfolding your spiritual potential is a
gradual process where the soul unfolds its greater powers. There are many
stages in this unfoldment, as there is in any growing process. Meditating
with Divine Light can help you navigate through these stages of developing
your soul’s potential.

How Evolution Expresses Itself in the Aura
The aura reveals where individuals are in their spiritual evolution and if
they are living up to their potential. As we have seen, as you develop your
aura, it brightens. Eventually it will even change shape to reflect its
enlightened status. We are all eventually going to develop the enlightened
aura. With this aura, all facets of the consciousness will come together and
express a new level of the divine life.
In the journey to enlightenment, the aura will go through many stages of
development. In fact, evolution reflects itself in every aspect of the aura.
The brightness of the aura, its shape and expansiveness, its intensity, the
configuration of energies, its clarity, the organization of energy flow—all
reflect varying levels of spiritual development. Yet within this spiritual
anatomy, certain areas of the aura particularly reflect specific facets of
spiritual development. It shows if you are dealing with an evolved soul and
if that person is expressing his or her potential.
One of those areas is the spiritual division (see Chapter 2). These
beautiful arcing bands of light are directly indicative of the spiritual status
of the individual. Quite simply, the brighter this division, the more
developed the soul. These bands of light represent accumulated Divine
Light earned throughout a soul’s evolution. We all have a spiritual division
but some people have spent more time building their spiritual power than
others.
Interestingly, I will often see a person with a very bright spiritual
division, meaning this is a developed soul, but is not accessing that divine
power. This reveals that this soul has a wonderful spiritual potential but is
not in touch with that potential. He or she needs to delve deeper into the
spiritual life. Such a person may not even be walking the spiritual path yet,
but has the potential to do very well once dedicated to the task. While you
cannot work with this division directly to access its power, as you develop
other parts of your consciousness, the bands of light in this division
brighten. Eventually you will naturally start drawing from this part of you.
Souls that are accessing their spiritual division are tapping into an
extraordinary part of their being. They are demonstrating that they are truly
living the spiritual life.

The Higher Self Point is another indicator of spiritual development.
Even though it is already in a divine state of consciousness, it is still
expanding and developing even more. Every time you bring light to the
Higher Self, not only are you blessing your aura, the Higher Self expands in
light. The more developed the soul, the brighter and more expansive the
Higher Self Point will be. When the Higher Self Point is developed, its light
rays are very expansive and luminous. Sometimes I will see a perpetual
flow of light coming down from the Higher Self to the aura, indicating that
the person is deeply into the spiritual life and is in very close contact with
the Higher Self. It shows someone who has trained and cultivated his or her
ego to let go of petty appetites and serve the greater good.
Similar to the spiritual division, sometimes you can see a highly
developed Higher Self Point but the person’s aura does not reflect that high
spiritual status. Too often, we ignore the promptings of the Higher Self and
while we do not diminish the power of the Higher Self when we do this, we
can diminish the power that can be received from there. Yet even if we lose
light through ignorance or misuse, that does not affect our Higher Self. It
remains in its pure state of consciousness. This is our saving grace. It means
that even when we make missteps in life, our Higher Self always tries to
steer us back on track. There is no soul past redemption once it turns itself
back to the Divine Light.
Another aspect of the aura that shows the spiritual status of the
individual is the Hermetic center. As you have learned, the Hermetic center
is the nucleus of your outer world activity. It is the seat of the soul. Here is
where the soul is gathering up the many experiences of life to learn and
grow. As it builds up power, the whole aura brightens, especially the
Hermetic center. Intense radiations of light move out of this center as the
soul matures. There are many colors and facets to this soul light. As we
learn the many lessons of life, gradually we build up the power in the soul
energy in the Hermetic center.
Then of course there is the mental center. To elevate the soul, the mind
must be elevated. In a spiritually illumined soul, the bands of luminous light
surrounding the upper part of the head are particularly strong. The mental
chakra is dazzling with light. In the mental division are enlightened thought
forms gracefully active and moving. Rays of the white light of spiritual
illumination can be seen down-raying from the higher realms connecting
the conscious mind of the individual to the infinite mind of God. This

person is in a steady flow of divine inspiration and has great clarity and
spiritual understanding.
One other aspect of the aura I would like to look at in connection to
spiritual evolution is the crown chakra. Much study has been done on this
vital center. Although you don’t work with it in the same way as the four
centers when doing the light work, this chakra is helping you to rise up to
your higher nature. It helps you to be more consciously aware of the
spiritual processes of life. Once this conscious awareness process begins,
this chakra changes its configuration and begins radiating fantastic flows of
light. It’s easy to understand why mystics through the ages have been
fascinated with this chakra. A developed crown chakra is an unmistakable
sign that this soul is expressing its spiritual potential. It must be noted that
as the soul grows, all the chakras become more luminous and exciting.
Sometimes I will see pyramid-shaped forms in the chakra when it is in a
high state of consciousness.
Meditations to Accentuate Evolution
There is no single meditation that will bring you to enlightenment, just as
there is no single exercise that can turn a child into an adult. Evolution is a
process. Yet there are things you can do to condition your consciousness to
make more room for the divine in your life.
The following meditations are very helpful to support your unfolding
spiritual life. A good energy to start with is the orange-red flame of
purification to help cut loose resistance from the lower nature.
Meditative Prayer to Release Resistance from the Lower Nature
“Down-ray the orange-red flame of purification to cleanse my
consciousness of any and all resistance to the Divine Light and to the
promptings of the spirit. I ask that this light especially go to the emotional
center to release any reluctance or hesitation at accepting higher, divine life.
May all my centers and all parts of my aura be bathed in this holy purifying

light, casting all black and gray atoms to the mineral kingdom to be
dissolved in the light.”
Take time to feel the light doing its job. If you recognize a specific area
of resistance, focus the light in that area. But don’t force things. When the
apple is ripe, it will fall from the tree. Sometimes we are not quite ready to
let go of something, and that’s okay. The soul has its own rhythm and tempo
of growth. Be patient yet persistent with yourself. If you are noticing a
particular area of resistance is strong, you can conduct the purifying
exercise with the white light instead of the orange-red flame.
Then follow up with the blue-white fire. Here you want to really feel the
new life force uplifting and inspiring you.
Meditative Prayer to Refresh the Soul with the Blue-White Fire
“Down-ray the blue-white fire of eternal life to all four spiritual centers and
all facets of my being to charge and recharge the aura with new life force. I
ask this holy power to refresh my soul in its spiritual journey and give it
strength to accomplish its highest potential. I am breathing in the holy
breath of God.”
Take a few deep breaths as you say the last sentence, repeating it a
couple of times so you feel the spiritual flow of this life-giving light.
Once you feel established in these powers, bring in a very special
energy that is directly connected to your spiritual growth—the apple green
ray. It is what is called a “pearl luster” energy because the hues are like the
opalescence of the inside of a seashell. Pearl luster energies are generally
more delicate and lighter in shade than some of the other rays but they can
be even more powerful. This is because they bring in the high ethereal
vibrations of light.
The apple green is actually a combination of energies. It brings in the
emerald green ray of balance and the golden ray of wisdom light. As
already noted, when this energy is seen in the aura it means this person is
making advances in his or her spiritual development. Working with this ray

brings in one of the best energies to help condition the consciousness to feel
comfortable with the process of spiritual evolution.
Meditative Prayer with the Apple Green Ray of Spiritual Growth and
Renewal
“Down-ray the apple green ray of spiritual growth and renewal to open up
my spiritual life and highest divine potential. Let this light flow through all
levels of my consciousness, especially into my soul levels, to attract new
experiences that are for my highest good. I ask that this light help me to
shape my life to reflect the divine life, to be willing to explore and try new
things. I ask that the apple green ray uplift my soul, releasing anything that
is burdening me or holding me back. May I always keep looking upward
and hold to the highest ideal of what I can be.”
As this energy is so ethereal, it may take a couple of meditations to get
into its divine rhythm. To help with this energy, you can also work with
another pearl luster energy—the powder blue of inspiration. The powder
blue ray is the ray to call on for new creative ideas. It is one of my favorite
energy rays. It’s especially effective if you are artistic or inventive. In your
evolution, it can open you up to a more enlightened way of thinking.
Meditative Prayer with the Powder Blue Ray of Divine Inspiration
“Down-ray the powder blue ray of inspiration to all levels of my
consciousness, especially my mental center, to open my mind to elevated
levels of thinking and ideas so that I may more clearly envision my highest
ideals and divine potential. With this holy power may I be given the vision
to live up to who I am and what I can be.”
Once again, take time to let this energy set in and remain open to
pictures or ideas that you may be given. Complete your meditation with the

lemon yellow ray to strengthen the mental center and your intellectual
powers to help you in your spiritual journey.
Meditative Prayer with the Lemon Yellow Ray for Greater Focus on the
Spiritual Path
“Down-ray the lemon yellow ray to my mental center and all levels of my
consciousness to increase my concentration to stay focused on my spiritual
path, releasing any confusion or distractions so my full attention is on my
spiritual growth. I ask that this light increase my intellectual powers so that
I use common sense and good judgment as I seek to fulfill my spiritual
potential and unravel the mysteries of life.”
Once you finish your meditation, in a separate session, follow through
with the Divine Light in any other areas of concern that might be holding
you back from fully pursuing your spiritual goals, such as financial,
professional, personal, relationship, or health situations. Working with the
light separately in these areas will give you more confidence in your
spiritual pursuits.
Making Room for the Divine in Your Life
A common complaint I hear when teaching the Higher Self meditation is “I
don’t have time to meditate.” Certainly many of us live a fast-paced
lifestyle. But it’s up to you to prioritize your time so that the most important
things take precedence. You can’t do everything. When people say they
don’t have time to meditate, it means they have not really made their
spiritual aspirations their priority. There may be interest or curiosity but not
yet a driving passion. Some try to bring their meditation into their active
life by calling in Divine Light while they drive or exercise. While calling on
the light during activity is a good thing (as long as you are not distracted),
this is not meditation. In meditation, you are in the meditative pose.

Your body and mind are in a still, receptive place. For the time you are
in meditation, the world does not exist. This is your one-on-one time with
God. What can be more important than that? Make your spiritual work your
priority and watch how the rest of your life falls into place.
Spiritual growth is a gradual process. To be really effective, your
spiritual work needs to become a lifestyle choice. Steady application
conditions you for the higher life. As with anything, as you organize your
life to accommodate your blossoming spirituality, the divine in you unfolds.
The bright orange ray of motivation is excellent to work with to better
organize your time, activities, and responsibilities. This ray is different from
the orange-red flame, which is used for purification. If you’ve been
discouraged or need more enthusiasm and ambition, this is the energy to
work with.
Meditative Prayer with the Bright Orange Ray for Motivation and
Organization
“Down-ray the bright orange ray of motivation and enthusiasm into all my
spiritual centers, and especially my Hermetic center, to increase my drive to
succeed in my spiritual quest. Let this energy out-ray from the heart center
to all my world affairs to help organize my activities, including my job,
relationships, and finances, so that I may dedicate more time to my spiritual
goals and more fully express my inner spiritual desires. I ask this power ray
to increase my motivation and excitement for the spiritual work.”
Feel the stimulating quality of this ray. I then recommend following up
with the pure white light to help increase your overall desire to reach your
spiritual potential. It takes not only a desire, but a burning desire, to reach
your highest self. Some recognize the value of spiritual work, but their
desire is not as strong as it could be. Fortunately desire can be fanned. Take
the desire you have and build on that. The white light is wonderful to work
with, as well as the pink ray, in helping to cultivate a genuine desire for the
higher life.

Meditative Prayer with the Pure White Light to Help Build Divine Desire
“Down-ray the pure white light to my Hermetic center to stimulate my soul
desire to make my spiritual ascent my priority. Help me to feel my spirit
self, my oneness with God, and the creative process of life.”
The emerald green ray is excellent to work with next if you feel your
attention is divided and that you are doing too many things at one time or if
something in your life is unbalanced and absorbing too much of your time
and energy.
Meditative Prayer with the Emerald Green Ray to Harmonize Spiritual
Pursuits
“Down-ray the emerald green ray to my Hermetic center to bring my life
into divine order so that all facets of my life are the expression of my
spiritual life. I ask to release any counterclockwise activity and to bring all
parts of my life into harmony.”
Being of Service
The spiritual path is never about just you. While it is essential to work on
yourself to build up your auric power and spiritual expression, part of that
expression is meant to reach out to others. We are not islands unto
ourselves, even if it feels like that at times. We are all interconnected. So
what you do affects the greater whole. You are ultimately responsible for
only your own soul’s evolution, yet a benefit of working with Divine Light
is that by improving yourself, you are changing the world.
As part of your light work and spiritual development, dedicate some of
your time, energy, and resources to helping others. It doesn’t matter so
much what you do, whether you volunteer at a hospital or soup kitchen or
you reach out to help family and friends in need, but give of yourself. This

act of service needs to be selfless, without thought of personal
remuneration. Give for the joy of giving. Don’t count your contributions.
Some of the more generous and gracious donors and philanthropists in the
world do not broadcast their work; they just do it.
If you find that in your spiritual work you are getting a little self-
absorbed, work with the deep rose pink ray of spiritual love to open your
heart. Then simply follow through on some type of humanitarian act. Get
outside of yourself and you will notice you are even closer in rhythm with
the Divine Light.
Meditative Prayer with the Deep Rose Pink Ray to Awaken Selfless
Service
“Down-ray the deep rose pink ray of spiritual love into all facets of my aura
and consciousness to open my heart, mind, and emotions to be more loving
and generous with my time, talents, and resources. I ask that this loving
power bring me courage and confidence to reach out and help others in joy
and gratitude, without condition or judgment, and without thought of
personal gain. I recognize that in giving of myself, it is the divine in me
acknowledging the divine in whomever I am privileged to help.”
Working with the Color Division and the Inner
Aura
Without question, the greatest challenge to reaching your spiritual potential
is not any outside situation or condition, it’s you! No matter how we may
desire the higher life, the lower nature most often resists the process until it
is brought under control. As you work on your character traits, you perfect
your soul attributes and are more willing to let your spiritual nature unfold.
All facets of the aura help build character. Yet two aspects of the auric
anatomy play a direct role in energetically supporting character building—
the color division and the inner aura.

The color division is an unusual part of the auric composition. (See
color Illustration 2.2E.) The brilliant, swirling sparkles of light that are the
elements of this division directly reflect how strongly you have been
building your character. If you have been working on your character
weaknesses and expressing your character strengths, these pinpoints of light
can greatly brighten. Since there are so many of these pinpoints of light, a
developed color division creates a dominant expression in the aura. It
supports and encourages the person to continue to develop and express
those character traits. In the same way, if you avoid or ignore working on
yourself, if you hide your talents and good qualities, or if you outright
cultivate disturbing or destructive habits, the points of light darken and
diminish. And a darkened color division can support and encourage more
destructive behavior.
As you develop your character qualities at different times in your life,
certain character traits will stand out the most. These energies will become
dominant in the color division for the time you are expressing them. For
example, if you are good with people and in the process of interacting with
others in a productive way, the pink light will be pronounced in this
division. If you show a particular gift for healing and are helping others in
this capacity, the rich blue sparkles of light will be outstanding in this
division. If you are a person who craves peace and exudes that quality to
others, the purple light will be strong.
While you have to be in the act of building your character to enlighten
the color division, you can ask the Divine Light to strengthen this area of
the aura so you are more motivated to be the best person you know how to
be.
Meditative Prayer with the Golden Ray to Strengthen the Color Division
of the Aura
“Down-ray the golden ray of wisdom light to my Higher Self Point of
Spiritual Knowing, and from there direct this dynamic light to my color
division. I ask that this light strengthen my color division and my dedication
to improving and expressing the diversity of my character. I honor my
unique soul and character traits and strive to lead a good life of high ideals.”

In addition to the color division, the inner aura plays a major role in
character development. The inner aura is truly a mystical part of your
nature. It’s called the inner aura because in essence it looks like an aura
within the aura and stays close to the body. In contrast to the “outer” aura,
which is the aura we have been working with in this book, the inner aura
has a very different pace of development and changes slowly over time. So
you won’t work with the inner aura in the same way you work with other
aspects of the energy field.
This aura is very connected to the soul expression and the life lessons
the soul is going through. How is a life lesson different from experiences
you deal with on a daily basis? As used in this book, a life lesson refers to a
recurring theme in your life connected to your soul character. Each of us in
this lifetime has certain qualities and traits that repeatedly express
themselves. You may have a recurring theme in your life regarding
patience. Maybe this is a lesson you have a constant battle with. You may
be too impulsive and miss opportunities. Slowly over time, you learn
patience, but it may take a good part of your life to do so. Or maybe a
recurring lesson is tolerance. Maybe you find yourself being inflexible with
people who do not share the same beliefs as yourself. And again it may take
the majority of your life to build a more tolerant nature. On the other hand,
say you show a committed determination. You don’t let things deter you
from what you wish to accomplish. Yet you find yourself faced with
adversity where you have to repeatedly express that determination. All these
experiences and character expressions build power in the aura and
especially the inner aura. Once a life lesson is truly learned, the inner aura
becomes luminous, reflecting that strengthened character trait. And it also
indicates that the person has made great strides in his or her spiritual
development.
So this type of character building is called a life lesson because it
usually takes a lifetime to learn! It doesn’t mean we are stupid or slow for
something to take a lifetime to learn. Just the opposite. Life lessons are part
of the big picture of who we are as souls and our expression as part of the
eternal process of life. Mastering a life lesson is one of the most important
things we can do in life and it will carry us far in our spiritual journey.
Before doing this meditation on strengthening the inner aura, take time
to review what you feel is a life lesson for you. What is a recurring theme in
your life when it comes to your character? And how successful or

unsuccessful have you been in strengthening this part of you? Strengthening
the inner aura is clearly something that will take patience, understanding,
and commitment. You are going to get out of this what you put into it.
The purple ray is wonderful to work with in the inner aura to still your
consciousness so you can better tune into where you are in this part of your
life. You can also work with the gentler violet ray or the deep rose pink ray.
Many times we don’t pay attention to our actions; we don’t take enough
time to improve ourselves. And if it’s a life lesson, we can get discouraged
if we don’t see the improvements we desire soon enough. Yet one of the
most elevating things is the cultivation and mastery of a life lesson. It truly
helps us to see the big picture of life, to walk to the rhythm of the divine,
and to better appreciate the spiritual forces at work in our own
consciousness and the breadth of the spiritual path we are walking on.
Meditative Prayer with the Purple Ray of Peace to Bless the Inner Aura
“Down-ray the purple ray of peace to my Hermetic center and out-ray to my
inner aura to bless this part of my consciousness so that I may be still to
hear my soul speak. Through this peace, let my spirit speak to my soul so
that I may better understand and appreciate my soul’s life lesson and see my
soul’s qualities for what they are. I recognize my soul is a divine spark of
life, and it is undergoing a process of evolution to more fully express the
powers within it. May God bless me with patience, love, and understanding
to master and fully express this lesson of my life.”
Overcoming Adversity
There’s an expression, “Our soul is forged in fire.” No one gets through life
without facing tests and challenges in some form; that’s part of why we’re
here. Sometimes when we are going through difficult times, we mistakenly
think that this is the time we are spiritually growing the least. Yet if we are
holding true to ourselves and doing the best job we can, we can actually be
making some of the greatest spiritual strides. Often our biggest challenge in
pursuing the spiritual life arises not when things are difficult but when

things are going well. It is in these times we may relax and fail to keep
pursuing our spiritual aspirations.
All the spiritual energy rays can help you through difficult times. But
since this chapter is focused on the aura and spiritual development, certain
energy rays are particularly helpful if you are finding it difficult to pursue
your spiritual goals.
One of the most power spiritual energies to work with to help you
overcome adversity and build spiritual fortitude is the indigo ray of spirit.
This energy brings in strength to the spirit. If you feel like you don’t have
what it takes to live up to your potential, or that you don’t feel you have the
strength to follow through on something that is being asked of you that is in
your best interests, this power ray can help. When this energy is seen in the
aura, it indicates a high, advanced soul. I don’t see this ray often in people.
You don’t need to receive much of the power to feel its strong
transformative effect. The indigo is a very deep blue, sometimes with
purple in it. In addition to any energy ray you feel can help, here is a
meditative prayer with the indigo ray. Visualize the light coming down as a
pearl of light rather than a beam.
Meditative Prayer with the Indigo Pearl to Strengthen the Soul
“I ask that if it be Thy will to down-ray the indigo ray of spirit as a beautiful
pearl of light to my Hermetic center to bless my soul. May I be given the
strength of spirit to overcome any test or trial and to realize that with God
anything can be accomplished. With the holy power give me the strength to
fully complete my spiritual journey and reach the spiritual summit. I
express my love and gratitude for everything in my life and all that the
divine blesses me with.”
One other exercise I would like to offer to help in overcoming
challenging and discouraging situations is to ask the Divine Light to go
below your feet. The lower part of your aura is where you are working out a
lot of old issues. They may not always be as active in your life as in other
times, but they are still there. But the lower part of the aura is also where
you build your spiritual platform of power, where you create your

foundation of Divine Light, so sending light to below the feet is very
helpful.
Some interesting energies can be seen below the feet, including the
purple light as described in the mixed aura in Chapter 2. (See color
Illustration 2.5.) When purple waves of energy are seen below the feet, it
shows you have been dealing with matters of life and have “overcome
them.” If the person is really doing well dealing with a very difficult
challenge, there can be a strong sphere of gold light just above the purple,
demonstrating that the person has really overcome a particularly
challenging situation. Sometimes if no purple light is there, it means it is a
quiet time and there are no pressing issues. Or if the purple is not there it
can mean that there are challenges but the person is not doing a good
enough job in dealing with them. Remember, the test of your spiritual
mettle is not what’s happening to you, it’s how you’re dealing with the
challenges of life. So depending on what is going on, this energy can come
and go.
In this meditative prayer, ask that the emerald green light go to the area
of your aura below your feet to give you a strong spiritual foundation for all
your activities and spiritual growth.
Meditative Prayer with the Emerald Green Ray to Strengthen the Auric
Power Below the Feet
“I ask to down-ray the emerald green ray of balance and harmony to below
my feet to form a strong foundation to fortify the auric power there. I ask
this divine power to keep me steady and strong wherever I go and whatever
I do.”
Walking the Path of Light
You can’t force evolution. It has to unfold naturally. At a certain point the
soul becomes aware of its true potential. This is what’s called the spiritual
awakening. When the soul awakens it’s an exhilarating feeling. There’s an

excitement beyond description—a feeling that anything can be
accomplished and a willingness to do anything to reach that potential.
What can you expect while walking this path of light? First recognize
this is a holy path and treat it with reverence. It’s the path that will lead you
back to your Eternal Home and eventually to God. Every step of the way is
sacred. This is why you enter with a clean heart and pure motives.
The blessings of traveling on this path of light are beyond description.
The Divine Light is dazzling. Once you are awakened to the greater
possibilities, a whole new world opens up. With each conscious step, you
will draw one step closer to unraveling the mysteries of life, one step closer
to perfecting yourself. You will reach the point where your outer life will be
the reflection of your inner divine life. No longer will you live solely by
your wits but through the awareness and connection to the greater whole.
You will become the embodiment of all you aspire to be. You won’t need to
search for love because you will embody love. You will not need to worry
about money because you will be the embodiment of abundance and supply.
You will eventually embody all the attributes of light, love, and wisdom.
Some think that when they start their spiritual journey they have to drop
everything and live like a recluse. There have been many stories to support
this idea. For some the path of renunciation is their spiritual road. But for
many others the goal is to reorganize their life to reflect the divine. The
spiritual path is not an escape from life but the fulfillment of it. It’s an
enhancement of all life’s processes. The best place to start on the path is
right where you are. Start at home. Start on your path by being a better wife
or husband, by being better at your job, and so on.
There’s a story about Mother Teresa that beautifully reflects this
principle. A very rich woman admired Mother Teresa greatly and wanted to
join her work of serving the poorest of the poor. Mother Teresa, seeing she
was not quite ready for such a life, dissuaded her from joining. The woman
was perplexed and saddened, asking what could she do. Mother Teresa
looked at the dress she was wearing and asked how much it cost. The
woman told her a large sum. Then Mother Teresa said, “Next time you go to
buy a dress like that, give the money to the poor instead.” So begin from
where you are and with what is comfortable, but begin.


CHAPTER 15
THE TRANSCENDENT CONSCIOUSNESS
WITH SPIRITUAL GROWTH COMES greater spiritual awareness. As we continue
on the journey of evolution and brighten our auras, we become more aware
of the divine forces of life at work. When people ask if they can learn to see
the aura, they unintentionally misunderstand the question. We all have this
inherent potential, but it remains latent until one is spiritually ready. Seeing
the aura is a byproduct of your spiritual evolution. It’s not about seeing
pretty colors; it’s about interacting with inner, divine forces. As you reach
certain states of consciousness in your spiritual unfoldment, mystical vision
opens naturally. This chapter is about facilitating a greater awakening of
your spiritual awareness. As this greater awakening unfolds, it can lead to
something called the transcendent consciousness.
Mystics throughout the ages have known of and taught a transcendent
consciousness. This is the experience of stepping out of the immersion in
physical consciousness and gaining a greater, objective experience of the
spiritual life. When we are immersed in physical life, we cannot see the
spiritual foundations of material existence. We are in what the Hindu
mystics call maya—the world of illusion. This doesn’t mean that the world
is not real. It means that defining life only by the five physical senses is an
illusion because life is far more than just the physical. The goal is to break
the illusion of maya and rejoin with ultimate reality. In our practice of
meditating with Divine Light, we are tuning in and working with spiritual
forces that cannot be physically seen yet enable us to see. The sacred
teachings of the Upanishads express this beautifully:
“That which is not seen by the eye, but by which the eye is able to
see: know that alone to be the Brahman (ultimate reality).”1

Working with Divine Light helps bring about positive, life-affirming
changes. This ultimately leads to the ability to transcend beyond the
material to comprehend the divine directly. Through this evolution of
consciousness, you can achieve higher states of awareness. The way you
live your life either strengthens or weakens your ability to attain such states.
Their ultimate purpose is to lead you to the great mystical experience—your
spiritual enlightenment.
To step into the transcendent consciousness, the soul must prepare. By
strengthening and refining your character and by awakening the faculties
that are part of your spiritual anatomy, you are building the bridge to the
transcendent life. Through devotion and dedication, the fruits of spirit
gradually flow through you, and nature will then reveal her inner secrets. As
you live the transcendent life, the transcendent opens up to you. Meditation
and prayer are key to building the power needed to experience life’s
sacredness and walk in greater harmony with God and the divine oneness.
Your Aura and the Mystical Awakening
Many aspects of your aura come together on the journey to mystical
experiences. As we have learned, the very shape of the aura—the auric shell
—is a key part of this process. As the soul nears its enlightened state, the
shape of the aura makes a fundamental shift from rounded to the pointed
oval. To get to this stage, many things have to be developed within the auric
field. Three aspects of the aura are particularly connected to the
transcendent consciousness: The Higher Self Point, the crown chakra, and
what is metaphysically termed the Christ consciousness.
Your Higher Self Point is key to awakening your spiritual awareness.
By its very nature, it brings you into spiritual knowing because it is already
in a divine state of consciousness. That is why it’s such a powerful ally.
Every time you raise your consciousness into your Higher Self Point, you
are building greater spiritual awareness. The light you are receiving from
the divine flows through your Higher Self Point, helping you to become
more aware of the divine consciousness you are receiving. Remember, your
meditations are experiences of divine consciousness. You don’t need to see
the light to have these experiences. That’s why meditation is so powerful. It

brings you in tune with the divine which, by its very nature, is
transformative.
Another part of your spiritual anatomy that is intimately connected with
awakening your spiritual awareness is the crown chakra. In our auric
meditations, we don’t need to work with the crown chakra as we do the
other centers because it is doing a lot of work itself on our behalf. A
primary function of the crown chakra is to coordinate the conscious
awareness of the inner, divine life. There are two basic states of the crown
chakra—open and closed—and variations within those two states. An
opened crown chakra means the soul has consciously awakened its mystical
nature. An unopened crown chakra means the soul is in the process of
developing that conscious awareness. Whether opened or closed, this
chakra is constantly functioning and plays an essential role.
For many, the crown chakra is operating in its closed state, and this is
perfectly normal. In this state, Divine Light and other cosmic powers flow
through your crown chakra to propel you on the spiritual path. For someone
to have a genuine metaphysical experience, the crown chakra is involved.
When you are having an experience of Divine Light, the crown chakra
facilitates that experience along with other aspects of your auric anatomy.
Some think that by focusing on the crown, they can awaken their mystical
nature directly. This is not quite how it works. Certainly, there are moments
of contemplating your crown chakra and periodically asking the Divine
Light to go there, but you develop this chakra as you are working with the
light and living the spiritual life.
When the soul starts to consciously awaken the spirit self through the
process of evolution, the crown gracefully starts to unfold. Radiations of
Divine Light start to shoot out from this chakra in a dazzling display of
power. There are many stages of unfolding the crown, hence the reference
to this chakra as the “thousand-petaled lotus.” In this awakened state, the
soul is consciously working with the divine powers to the degree of the
awakening. Eventually, as this chakra fully opens along with other elements
of consciousness that need to be developed, the soul reaches enlightenment
and a new era of the soul begins.
The Soul and the Christ Consciousness

There is one more facet of your consciousness I would like to introduce
which is intimately connected with building the transcendent experience. It
has gone by different names through the ages. In the Hindu tradition, this
consciousness is sometimes called the Krishna consciousness. In the
metaphysics of The Kingdom of Light Teachings, it’s known as the Christ
consciousness.
This consciousness dwells within all of us regardless of belief. From the
Greek word “Christos” meaning “to anoint,” this consciousness is anointed
with divine essence. Unlike the Higher Self Point and the crown chakra
which are located outside the body, the Christ consciousness is within us.
We connect with it through our mental center. While other aspects of the
aura can darken, the Christ consciousness retains its divine state. It can’t
become tainted but it can waiver in its strength, varying in an individual
from being weak, or as I call it, on “pilot light,” to very strong. When
strong, the soul is truly encompassing the consciousness the light is
bringing. As we enlighten the mind and build up the light of our aura, this
Christ consciousness intensifies.
Your Christ consciousness awakens gradually. It stirs when you have
your spiritual awakening. It supports you throughout your spiritual growth.
It helps you to experience the divine more deeply in all its joy, mystery,
intelligence and creative expression. Most importantly, you don’t awaken
your Christ consciousness on your own; you have help from the divine. In
the same way the light is sent to you, the divine supports the stirring of this
truly transcendent consciousness.
Your Christ consciousness coordinates the activities of the Higher Self
Point and the crown chakra so that these powers are more effectively
incorporated in yourself. It helps make sure you receive the light accurately,
even if you happen not to be in the best frame of mind when you meditate.
Meditative Prayers to Stir Your Mystical
Awareness
Here are some meditative prayers to stimulate the transcendent
consciousness in you. In the following meditation, the goal is to build a

stronger link between the Higher Self Point and you, especially in the
mental center.
Meditative Prayer to Awaken Spiritual Knowing Through the Higher Self
Point
“Down-ray the emerald green ray of balance and harmony into my mental
center to strengthen the relationship with my Higher Self. I open my mind
to receive spiritual knowing so that I understand things more from the eyes
of spirit.”
Periodically, it’s a good idea to ask the Divine Light to go to the crown
chakra to support and facilitate the process of your unfolding spiritual
perceptions.
Meditative Prayer with the Gold Light in the Crown Chakra
“Down-ray the golden ray of wisdom light into my crown chakra. I ask this
light to strengthen the crown chakra and to facilitate the awakening of my
spiritual awareness. I ask the golden ray to grant illumination and condition
my consciousness so that I can more deeply perceive the spiritual
dimensions of life.”
The following meditative prayer is designed to help you better tune into
your Christ consciousness. In this meditative prayer, you work with both
the purple and gold rays.
Meditative Prayer with the Purple and Gold Rays to Step into the
Christed Presence

“Down-ray the purple ray of peace to bless my aura and still my mind in the
Silence of Peace and the Peace of Silence that I may feel the eternal peace
of Spirit. Then down-ray the golden ray of wisdom light into my mental
center to fortify me and steady my consciousness. I ask that you to merge
the purple and gold rays to raise my consciousness so that I may step into
the glorious presence of my own Christ consciousness.”
This meditative prayer helps if you feel resistance to building greater
awareness:
Meditative Prayer with the Deep Rose Pink Ray to Open the Hermetic
Center
“Down-ray to me the deep rose pink ray of spiritual love to the Hermetic
center to fill my heart and aura with Divine Love. Release me from any
anguish or hardness of heart so that I may welcome the Divine spirit into
my soul to inspire and guide me on the path of spiritual illumination.”
This meditative prayer helps to unite the Christ consciousness with your
spiritual unfoldment:
Meditative Prayer with the White Light to Stir Your Christ Consciousness
“Down-ray the pure white light into my mind, body and soul to awaken my
own Christ consciousness so that I may activate my inner mystical nature,
ascend the path of Divine Light, and feel the light and love of God flow
freely through me. I am one body in Thy body of Eternal light.”
The Transcendent and the Search for Truth

In building your mystical awareness, a key component to success is the
search for truth. Your spiritual power increases the more you see things in
their true light. In ancient days, a person who had a direct connection with
the divine was called a “prophet”—one who knows. The ancient Greek
mystic and mathematician Pythagoras took a humble approach when
teaching this exalted state to his students by using the term philosopher—
one who seeks to know. In pursuing metaphysics, you are a philosopher in
the Pythagorean sense. The search for truth is essential in all aspects of life,
and it’s especially important in your spiritual journey.
One of the most fascinating aspects of the human aura is that it doesn’t
lie! If you are feeling love, an elevating pink energy in your aura will reflect
that love. Anger creates a disturbing, vitiated red energy that needs to be
cleared out. We can lie to each other or to ourselves, but we cannot conceal
that lie from the aura. So the aura is a spiritual truth teller.
With the explosion of the Information Age where misinformation can
travel faster than truth, it is more important than ever to distinguish what is
true from what is false. Truth is part of the universal laws of life. It shows
up in the aura as a dynamic royal blue light. We all have differing opinions,
but opinions are not truth. Opinions and beliefs are personal, subjective
perspectives and not necessarily objective truths. As a spiritual seeker, you
want the truth. If you discover you are wrong about something, quickly
acknowledge and correct it. There may be a sting at first to realize you
accepted something that wasn’t true, but that sting is temporary. Once you
let it go, new, healthier opportunities open up for you. Truth really does set
you free!
Working with spiritual energy helps you see things in their true light.
You will engage in more activities that help your spiritual growth and start
dropping those that aren’t helpful. For example, you may discover that
you’re in the wrong job and start looking for a new and better one. The
Divine Light also guides you to see others in their true light. This will help
you build true and lasting friendships and let go of relationships that don’t
support your best interests.
In the same way, the Divine Light will begin to show you in your true
light. You’ll see more clearly your own strengths and weaknesses. The parts
of your life that are already strong will amplify and you will find yourself
appreciating those positive qualities more. The fruits of your spiritual life

will begin to express themselves in daily life. You’ll also gradually forgive
and let go of self-destructive habits that hold you back.
Seeing things in their true light is not easy to do. For example, if you are
infatuated with someone, you may ignore the truth that this person may not
be right for you. Or if you’re causing trouble at work but pointing the blame
at others, it takes courage to recognize your error and change things. The
Divine Light doesn’t bring us what we wish to see or experience. It brings
what is best for us, situations that will draw out our highest and most noble
qualities, even if we unintentionally resist those influences at first. As truth
becomes more and more a part of you, your mind and heart become clear
and receptive to divine influences. The only way you can really step into the
transcendent state is when your consciousness is free and unencumbered.
Here is a meditative prayer to motivate you on the path of truth.
Meditative Prayer with the Royal Blue Ray of Truth
“Down-ray the royal blue ray of truth into my mind and heart. I ask this
Divine Light to teach me the ways of eternal truth. May I strive to see all
things as they really are. Release from me from false pictures and ideas that
are holding me back from my full spiritual unfoldment. May truth lead me
upward on the path of spiritual awareness and enlightenment.”
1 Kena-Upanishad, translation by Swami Paramananda


PART V
Supporting Your Meditation Practice


CHAPTER 16
THE LIGHT IN ALL ASPECTS OF YOUR LIFE
YOU NOW HAVE A strong working knowledge of the Divine Light. You have
the tools to call on your Higher Self to access the Divine Light and many
examples of how to implement that energy in your active life. In this
chapter, we will explore techniques you can use in conjunction with the
Higher Self meditation that will amplify the light process to an even greater
extent.
Living in a Sea of Energy
All life is teeming with spiritual energy. Even what appears to be empty
space is filled with spiritual activity. Because you live in this sea of energy,
you’re constantly intermingling with other energy flows. Think of how
many people you interact with on a daily basis. Each one of these people
has his or her own auric field, which may be enlightened or devolved or
mixed. So in developing your aura, you need to be aware not only of your
own vibration, but of how you are interacting with other vibrations. To
maintain your spiritual equilibrium, strive to maintain a healthy interaction
with the world around you.
Protection
To stay in your own auric flow, start by keeping your spiritual protection
strongly around you. People who are unaware of the interaction of auric
energies always ask me, “Protection from what?” I begin to explain all the

ways you can open up to negative energy. Fortunately, the aura has
protective energies built into it that buffer unwanted negative energy. Yet
adding spiritual protection is extremely valuable.
Golden Sphere with Orange-Red Flame
This protective exercise is very similar to the golden bubble of protection
you use when going into meditation. The difference is that you surround the
circumference of your golden bubble with the orange-red flame to dissolve
any negative energy that might be trying to push in. All positive flows
continue normally.
In the same manner as in Step 2 of your Higher Self meditation, stand
up and hold your arms out, envisioning yourself surrounded by a golden
bubble of light about arm’s length from your body. Sense and feel this
sphere of golden light as vividly as you can. Envision seven flows of this
living light enfolding you in a protective sheath. Once the gold light is
established, envision the orange-red flame surrounding the golden sphere
and making the bubble look like a fireball of living light. Envision the
protective light surrounding you while saying the following prayer.
Golden Protection with the Orange-Red Flame
“Encircle me now in a golden bubble of protective light. I ask that seven
flows of this light surround me, keeping me in perfect protection. And I ask
that Thou place the orange-red flame around the circumference of this
protection, dissolving any negative energies that might try to penetrate this
bubble.”
Surround yourself with protection before you leave your house, and
reinforce it as needed throughout the day. This protection is especially
important if you’re going into a crowd of people, whether at a party,
business meeting, concert, movie, or any gathering. Protecting yourself will
quickly become second nature to you and is one of the most important

spiritual tools you possess. As you work with the protective light, it will
become stronger.
Closing the Psychic Door
One of the first exercises I give students for building their spiritual
protection is called “closing the psychic door.” The psychic door is an
interesting part of your spiritual anatomy. It’s a spiritual filtration system
connected to your subconscious mind. The subconscious is the seat of
memory. It records every experience verbatim. Your subconscious mind is
particularly susceptible to outside influences. It is like an incredibly
sensitive recording device that picks up everything that’s happening around
you. As a result, and without your intending it, the subconscious mind can
take in negative mental currents.
To protect the subconscious, the aura has built into it a filtration system.
Its purpose is to shut out outside destructive thought currents, allowing only
positive thought currents to enter. However, this door can swing open
through stress, destructive behavior, disturbances, and emotional outbursts.
Once this “door” is open, you’re open to any thought moving in the
periphery of the subconscious—the good, the bad, and the ugly. This door
can become an Achilles’ heel if you’re not careful. It’s not at all uncommon
to have the psychic door open, yet it’s easy to close.
The psychic door is located just behind the right ear and looks like a
blue flap when it is open. It’s important to make sure this door is kept
closed at all times, permitting only good thoughts to enter. Having a stiff
neck, or feeling that someone is a “pain in the neck,” can be a sign that your
door may be open. The actual spiritual mechanism by which this door is
closed is too involved to describe in these pages, but by following this
simplified procedure, you’ll get the job done.
Place your right index and third fingers behind your right ear over the
psychic door and envision a golden gingerbread man (I like to have fun
with this!) in the center of your head. See his right hand extending out
shooting light rays and shutting the door from the inside. (See Illustration
16.1.) Then envision that door being sealed with three impenetrable golden
white locks. As you are doing this, recite the following prayer in an affir-
mative, strong tone.

Closing the Psychic Door : ILLUSTRATION 16.1
Closing the Psychic Door
“I command my psychic door to be sealed and locked with three
impenetrable golden white locks, and I refuse to permit anything negative
to enter therein.”
Envision the door sealing shut like the locks on a bank vault. Once you
have successfully performed this exercise, your door is closed. Later, if
something has upset you and you feel the door may have become open
again, just repeat the exercise.
The Energy We Leave Behind
Albert Schweitzer once said that whatever we do in life, we should “leave
the footprints of love behind us.” We’ve all felt the ripple effect of our
actions. How many times have you entered a home for the first time and felt
either comfortable or strangely repelled? This can be even before you meet

the person living there. Why do you feel this? Because the house has been
“charged up” with that person’s vibrations. Churches and temples
demonstrate this principle very noticeably with their chanting, glowing
candles, incense, holy water, etc. These places have accumulated the
spiritual vibrations of these inspiring expressions, not to mention the years
of prayers, so people can’t help but feel spiritually uplifted just by being
there.
This works at both ends of the spectrum. There is a story about a bridge
in London that’s particularly famous for people committing suicide by
jumping off it. This in itself isn’t so unusual. What makes this bridge so
unusual is that a very high percentage of these people jumped from the
same exact spot. Of course, they were unaware they were doing this, but
they usually gravitated to the same place. Why would they do this? Because
that certain area had been charged up with the vibrational energy of suicide,
and people in this frame of mind were intuitively drawn to that energy.
This auric effect works at all levels of interaction, including chairs you
sit in, places you visit, the clothing you wear, and everything you interact
with. I had a dear friend who bought an ancient chair dating from the Ming
dynasty that a high official was supposed to have sat in. She was proud of
this purchase and placed it prominently in her home. Yet, for some reason,
having it in her house made her feel very uncomfortable. She told herself
she was just being irrational. As the days passed, her uneasiness only grew.
She invited me to see if I could tune into anything that would explain her
unsettling feeling. The chair was jet-black and somewhat plain for a piece
of furniture designed for such a regal purpose. The moment I got close to it,
my stomach did several flip-flops, which told me something was very
wrong. I clairvoyantly looked at the chair and saw black light around it. I
knew right then and there that the chair had been connected with terrible
things. Then I got the pictures that the person or persons who had sat in this
chair had been responsible for many cruel acts, and those vibrations were
still embedded in the chair. My friend did some research and discovered
that the official associated with the chair had been responsible for
executions and barbaric acts. We purified the chair, but she decided to sell it
anyway.
As you work with the light, you will get into the feeling and knowing of
where and when you need to send the light. My first recommendation in
working with energies around you is to send the light ahead of you to places

you’ll be going to and people you’ll be meeting. In my morning
meditations, I add the following prayer, asking the light to walk ahead of
me to prepare every person and place I will be dealing with that day. If I
know specifically who or what they are, I name them. This sends a signal to
the Higher Self to begin the energy process.
Meditative Prayer to Send the Light Ahead of You
“I ask the Divine Light to walk ahead of me to prepare the way as I go to
(name place or places). Let it touch into (name people you’ll be in contact
with) and purify them of any black and gray atoms, dissolving them in the
mineral kingdom in the light and bringing in new life force and divine
energy.”
You can name any other energy you feel is appropriate as well, such as
love or peace. This prayer will help to dissipate any negative energy you
may encounter. You can also purify things as you go along. If you get a
letter that may not be so good, you can ask the light to go into it before you
read it. If you’re going to make a difficult phone call that might be
distressing, ask the light to touch into the person you’ll be calling and into
the call itself to help keep things moving on a positive level. Even when
you go to a movie theater, you’ll want to purify the seat you’re in so as not
to pick up the spiritual atoms of the person before you.
The purification for cleansing objects is also very simple. If you can
hold the object in your hands, hold it in your left hand with your right hand
on top. If not, ask the light to go to the object. Ask your Higher Self to
cleanse whatever you feel needs it with a prayer like the following.
Meditative Prayer for Object Cleansing
“Down-ray the orange-red flame into my right hand and into (name object),
purifying it of any black and gray atoms and dissolving them in the mineral

kingdom. Then down-ray the blue-white fire to establish new life energy
within this (name object).”
It may take several minutes for the energy to start working. You can ask
that the cleansing be done for you either in meditation or right as the need
arises. By the way, material cleanliness has nothing to do with this process.
An object can be immaculate and germ free while also being spiritually
dirty.
When you are out and about to ask the Divine Light to purify seats you
are sitting in at restaurants, theaters, and other public places. You don’t need
to raise your consciousness to do this or go through the six steps to meditate
with light. Just ask the orange-red flame of purification to cleanse the seat
you are sitting in and your job is done. By doing this, you are keeping the
consistency of the Divine Light working with you even outside your
meditation time.
In general, watch your energy flow as it relates to your environment. Do
you notice times when you are getting hit by negative energy? Are there
certain places or people that seem to disagree with you on a consistent
basis? Are you able to brush these vibrations off easily or are you easily
affected? Are there places you frequent that you are better off staying away
from?
Remember, your goal is to maintain your spiritual equilibrium
regardless of what is going on around you. Your meditation time is a sacred
time to connect with the light, but you must also maintain that presence of
light as you go about your daily activities. It is as you live these principles
of light that you are evolving.
Children and Meditation
I am often asked if children can do the light work. It’s exciting to see with
more people interested in the aura and spiritual energy that they wish their
children to be a part of that experience. Sometimes, it’s the child expressing
an interest in spiritual topics.
Children have an aura just like adults do and they earn spiritual light.
We must remember that there is a full soul in every child’s developing body,

so children are going through the same process of evolution as everyone
else. Yet there are some differences and considerations here.
First, while it’s an adult soul in that little body, the spiritual power of the
child is still developing. As we explored previously, the aura energy is not
“set” until age seven, which means that until that time, the consciousness is
very pliable and impressionable. This is needed because of all the child
must absorb and learn. Then there is another auric milestone at age twelve.
This is when the soul receives its Higher Self Point. Up to that time, the
child has the other chakra points, which are also getting stronger, but not
that radiant Higher Self Point above the head. Until age twelve, children
receive Divine Light and assistance in other ways. They get a lot of support
from what we know of as the guardian angels and another group of celestial
beings called “Sisters in Light.” These divine beings, understanding that the
children are developing their full awareness, do a lot of the receiving and
transmitting of light until they mature.
It is not recommended for a child to practice the Higher Self meditation
until he or she is twelve. After that it’s a life-enhancing experience and
hopefully one the child will want to practice. Up to the age of twelve, what
a child can do is practice reflective meditation (see Chapter 17). Reflective
meditation will bring in spiritual energy. It’s a fun process and gets a child’s
creativity and imagination involved.
Introducing children to meditation at a young age is becoming more
common at home and even at school, where some school systems are
offering a “quiet time” for their students with positive results.
If you notice your children are curious or interested in the light work
you are doing, you can gently introduce them to the idea that all of us have
this beautiful colorful aura around us. It tells us who we are and what is
going on with us. This is God’s light in us. And every day God blesses us
with Divine Light to help us. They can simply close their eyes and ask God
to bless them with Divine Light.
You can introduce your children to the idea that every time they do
something good and help someone, say a kind word, learn something new,
or strengthen their own character, they brighten their aura. Teach them that
God’s light is in everyone, even if others don’t believe in God or are doing
things that are not so good. Remind them that not everyone understands
meditation and prayer, especially when it comes to spiritual light. They may
think what you are doing is silly. That is okay, as they can believe what they

wish. Let them be where they are. But you have to be true to yourself. It’s
often better not to talk about the light work you are doing.
When teaching your children about working with Divine Light, make it
fun. For example, if they are scared, they can envision a golden bubble and
feel God’s protection surrounding them. Let them know they must still
show the same caution and common sense as usual, but this is an added
help, like having a secret friend in their corner.
If your children are nervous, they can envision themselves running
through a field of purple flowers and feeling very peaceful. If they need
more confidence, they can see themselves in a golden waterfall feeling
strong and mighty, able to do anything.
When they are feeling sad about something, they can envision pink
hearts floating down from above and going inside their bodies, filling them
with a loving, warm pink light that makes them feel happy and joyful.
If they are tired, they can see themselves in a garden of bright red roses,
which will send them their beauty, strength, and vitality, making them feel
peppy.
For times when your children are sick, in addition to seeking the
medical care to get them well, tell them to see themselves floating in a pool
of deep rich blue water. This water is like living healing light. As they are
floating in this water, they feel healthy and well.
To help them study, they can see silver diamond points of light
showering them, the sparkles of light making them feel more alert and
clearheaded. Or they can see themselves in a bubble of lemon yellow light
and feel focused and motivated to learn. If discouraged, they can envision
themselves eating a celestial orange. As they do, bright orange light fills
their bodies and makes them feel encouraged and motivated.
When your children finish with these types of reflective meditations,
they should take a moment to feel grounded, alert, and awake.
As an alternative to visualizing Divine Light, you can play games with
your children to think about qualities. They can close their eyes and image
themselves very happy, joyful, kind, caring, adventurous, smart, humorous,
strong, and so on. The variations are endless. By doing this, they will attract
these spiritual attributes to their auras.
Of course, you do this in addition to all the good parental advice you
would instill in your child, the good ethics and morality. It’s also important
to teach a spiritually minded child to pray—which is the complement to

meditation. Prayer is a reaching out to the divine; meditation is a receiving
from the divine. Reflective meditation complements any religious practice
or is effective alone simply for its own intrinsic value.
Introducing children to the tools of reflective meditation at a young age
—again, if they are interested—will elevate their aura, help them in their
lives, and prepare them for when they are older. It can be a wonderful way
to bring in healthy spiritual principles at a young age.
Purifying Your Home
An important place to concentrate your purification work is in your own
home. Your home is your sanctuary and obviously an important place to
keep spiritually strong. People coming to your home or living in your home
can unintentionally generate negative energy and that energy needs to be
cleared. Otherwise, you could pick up that negative energy without even
knowing it. The purification needs to go to your door, computer, TV, mobile
device, mailbox, telephone, and especially the bed you sleep in. Many
people burn incense to cleanse their home. There are religious traditions of
asking a priest or holy person to come and bless your house. These helpful
practices and should be done periodically.
To cleanse your home with the light, it helps to work with candles (see
Chapter 20 in working with candles in meditation). One such exercise is to
burn three orange candles in a triangle formation in the center of the house.
Put a bowl of water in the middle. This will act as a “demagnetizing” bowl
to draw the black and gray atoms being released. Burn the candles for
twenty minutes. (Votive candles work well. Safety first. Never leave a
candle unattended or in reach of young children or animals.) Ask the
orange-red flame to sweep through your home, dissolving any negative
energies and dissolving the black and gray atoms in the mineral kingdom.
After twenty minutes, blow out the candles, then throw out the water
and replace it with new water. Place three blue candles in a triangle
formation and light them. Ask the blue-white fire to sweep through the
home, charging and recharging your home with new life force. Again leave
the candles lit for approximately twenty minutes. Extinguish the candles,
throw out the water, and you are done. The following meditative prayer can
be used to help start the cleansing process.

Meditative Prayer to Purify Your Home
“Down-ray the orange-red flame into the center of this house, and then out-
ray throughout the house, including all rooms, grounds, and property. Take
all black and gray atoms at least ten feet into the mineral kingdom and
dissolve them in the light. Upon completion of this purification, down-ray
the bluewhite fire to charge and recharge all aspects of this home, retaining
this energy and bringing this house into the highest vibration possible.”
If you need to focus the light in a particular room, place the candles in
that room and do a cleansing for just that room. If you live in an apartment
building, see the light radiating throughout your own unit and also
dissolving any negative energies from adjoining units. I have found that
burning sage and taking that sage to all rooms of the house effects a
wonderful cleansing as well. If you do this, ask the light to go into the sage
itself to amplify the cleansing process. I would repeat this exercise every
day until you feel it’s well established.
Follow up your spiritual housecleaning with a prayer of protection. The
prayer itself is a power that builds up over time, helping to keep negative
energies out, while also uplifting visitors who come in.
Protection for House
“Down-ray the golden ray of Thy divine protection to surround this home in
seven flows of this light, strongly protecting everything herein and
everyone who enters. In Thy holy name I ask this.”
Sending Divine Light to Others in Need
Although this book is focused on working with spiritual energy for yourself,
you will discover that the more you work with the light, the more you will
become aware of how much others need the Divine Light. You can always

offer to teach them the techniques of the Higher Self meditation. Yet, many
times you will find it best simply to pray for others to be blessed with
Divine Light.
There is an art to being a channel of light for others. This requires
training beyond the scope of this book, yet I want to offer a simple
technique for sending light to others. The method of sending light to others
is called absentee healing, which means the person receiving the light is not
physically present with you.
The most important thing to remember in prayer for others is that you
are the channel of light, but you don’t want to “give” your own light to
someone else in need. You want to be a channel for the light, Higher Self to
Higher Self. Second, you don’t want to take it upon yourself to direct the
light to specific areas of another person’s consciousness, such as specific
chakras, auric divisions, etc. You may do this for yourself, but it’s different
for others. When sending light to others, all you are doing is permitting the
Higher Self to use you as a base of Divine Light. How the light works with
them is entirely in the hands of the Higher Self.
To be a channel of Divine Light for someone else, start by sitting in a
chair and envision the golden light of protection surrounding you. Feel very
protected and safe. Get in the meditative state and raise your consciousness
as you normally would. Envision the person you wish to send the light to.
Then ask the divine to down-ray to your Higher Self Point the energy ray
you feel that person needs. For example, if you wish to send love to
someone, first see the love ray down-raying to your Higher Self Point. Then
ask permission of the Higher Self Point of the person you are working with
to send the light to him or her. Hold in silence for a moment. Then ask the
Higher Self to use your Higher Self Point to send this love ray to that
person’s Higher Self Point. Hold for a few moments as this is being done
“according to divine law and love for the good of all concerned.” As
mentioned, don’t go into details of where the light is going. That is not your
job. You don’t want to get personal about this. All this is happening Higher
Self to Higher Self. That way you are the channel and not pulling on your
own energy field. And by doing it this way you are not imposing your own
will on the spiritual realm; you’re simply being of selfless service to
another in need.
Once you feel the connection is made, you are finished or you can
repeat this exercise with one or two other power rays at most. Don’t overdo

this! I would also not do this for more than a couple of people in a single
day. When you get into the rhythm of this, it is a powerful tool and it’s a
beautiful, loving process to watch. When you are completely finished with
your work, ask the orange-red flame of purification to shower you to release
any negative energy you might have unintentionally picked up. Reinforce
your protection once again and you are finished!
Leading a Group Meditation
A wonderful way to work with Divine Light is in a group meditation. This
is what I do in all my classes. You can invite a group of like-minded
individuals to join you in your light meditations. In this work, you are not
being the channel of light for another person. Rather, you are leading the
meditation and the others are receiving the light from their own Higher Self.
This is a great way to introduce the light work to other people so they can
experience the light for themselves.
In a group meditation, you would verbally bring the light down as you
would for yourself but include the people present in the room with you. So
instead of starting the meditation by saying, “I raise my consciousness into
Thy consciousness…” you would say, “We raise our consciousness into Thy
consciousness…”
Then when you start bringing down the light, you would include the
others by saying something like, “Down-ray the Divine Light to our Higher
Self Point and to all our spiritual energy centers…” Everyone would be
following your lead as the light comes down, yet will be experiencing the
energy in their own way.
Group meditation is powerful because when everyone is in harmony
with the meditation, the effect of the light can be even stronger than when
you meditate on your own. I encourage people to start their own informal
meditation group, as it can be such a support in their Divine Light work and
help many others.


CHAPTER 17
REFLECTIVE MEDITATION
REFLECTIVE MEDITATION IS A wonderfully simple way to work with the light.
If the Higher Self meditation feels a little complicated at first, if you’re
having trouble concentrating during your meditation, or if you’re simply not
in the mood to go through the steps of down-raying light, reflective
meditation is another way of drawing energy to you. It’s useful for stilling
the consciousness when you are looking for spiritual inspiration and
guidance, or simply to feel your oneness with God.
In a reflective meditation you’re focusing your attention on an image
that’s pleasing and uplifting. In your imaging, you visualize the color of the
energy you want. By doing this, you’re attracting the energy and vibration
you’re envisioning. For example, if you envision yourself running through a
field of bright yellow flowers, you’re putting your attention on the beauty
and vibrancy of that yellow color. If you really connect with that image and
really feel and sense those yellow flowers, this actually triggers the effect of
drawing in the lemon yellow energy to you. The energy will not come with
the same intensity as it would with your Higher Self meditation, but the
connection will be made. This principle of attraction is nothing new. You
experience this reflective power when you daydream and let your mind
wander to a beautiful tropical island you would like to visit, or in
contemplating the face of someone you love. These daydreams have a
quality of automatically uplifting you because, for that moment, your
consciousness is actually connecting with the person or thing you’re
contemplating. Reflective meditation is applying this principle.
Reflective meditation helps relax the conscious mind from stress. By
concentrating on mental images that are pleasing and soothing, you will
quiet the mind. Once the mind is stilled, the spiritual energy can flow more

freely, energizing the mental levels and making them more receptive to the
higher flows of light.
You can use reflective meditation for any condition you would work on
with your Higher Self meditation, but now you use specific imagery instead
of down-raying to attract the light you need. To begin your reflective
meditation, find a quiet place to do your work as you would with the Higher
Self meditation. Light a candle if you wish. You can play a little music if
that helps to set the mood. Put your protective light around you and begin.
In this case, the only preparation you need is to decide which energy you
want to work with and what imagery you want to associate it with. Make
the image something that really appeals to you and something you can
envision vividly. Then close your eyes and mentally see yourself there. Take
your time with this so you really step into the picture, feeling and sensing
just what you’re envisioning.
A simple use of this imagery is to see yourself receiving a showering of
the light you desire. For example, if you’re calling on the purple ray of
spiritual peace, see this color showering your entire body as if you were in a
waterfall. Let it touch into every part of your being, soaking in through the
pores of your skin, relaxing and uplifting you in this peace. You can follow
the same exercise with each energy you feel you need.
You can use scenes to generate the energy you want. If you’re
depressed, visualize yourself in a waterfall, and feel orange-red water
rushing down over you, releasing you from those dark atoms. Once that’s
established, envision scintillating sprays of shimmering blue-white water
caressing your entire being with beautiful, energetic life force, lifting you
out of depression and soul sadness. Enter a pool of emerald green water and
feel the balance and harmony of this brilliant green water surrounding you.
Try to envision the colors being as rich and as pure as you can. If it is
difficult for you to visualize such scenes, let your feeling and sensing take
over as you go through your reflective meditation.
If you wish to endow your mental body with more powers of
concentration and studiousness, you can take a stroll through a meadow of
bright yellow tulips, breathing in and filling yourself with their vibrant
yellowness as you become one with its power. Continue to stay in this field
until you actually feel energized. If you are lonely and feel unloved, sit on a
hill and merge with a deep rose pink cloud and just float, dropping away all
the cares of the day. Feel yourself in this beautiful pink cloud, resting in the

arms of love. Or run through a field of pink roses and feel the beautiful
essence of that pink swirling around you and filling you, until you feel the
spiritual love established. There are infinite variations. Through practice,
you will find the imagery that works best for you. Let your imagination
really take over. Reflective meditation adds variety to your meditations.
Guided Imagery
With guided imagery, there is nothing to do but experience. The reflective
meditation should be experienced as though you were actually there, and
you should encourage your feelings to come through. The best way to
follow the scenes depicted here is to record the words and follow along as
you play it back.
Forest Setting
Picture yourself at a mountain campsite. It is the start of a rosy-fingered
dawn, and the singing of birds is just awakening you. Inside your sleeping
bag, you’re snug, warm, and cozy. You feel a hint of cool, crisp mountain
air brushing your cheeks, inviting you to leave your tent and explore the
beautiful forest around you.
You slip quietly out of your sleeping bag, put on your boots, pick up a
towel, and step out of your tent. You then breathe in deeply the pine scent of
the forest, feeling the life-giving breath filling your lungs and igniting every
cell in your body. You stretch your body and lift your eyes, following the
line of emerald green pines all the way up to the rosy skies of dawn. You
see a path leading away from your campsite and into the forest; you want to
find out where it goes. The rich red-brown earth is soft and supports your
steps with gentle strength as you proceed along the path. You step on pine
needles and hear them snap beneath your feet. You feel the tingle of the
cool morning air around your nose and cheeks. You hear a gentle breeze
rustling through the leaves. You sense the powerful life force flowing freely
all around you, from the rich earth to the tops of the majestic trees. The
trees tower over you, enveloping you in their eternal strength and stillness.
You are at one with the tranquility of the forest’s deep verdant green.

You proceed along the path and discover a clearing, which opens to a
gentle cascading waterfall that feeds into a clear shallow pool, the source of
a mountain stream. The pool reflects and shows the sky above. Clear blue,
with streaks of pink and dancing golden sunbeams sparkling on the water.
The sun is warm and the shimmering pool invites you to bathe in its pure,
fresh waters. You remove your clothing and wade into the cool, invigorating
water, feeling warm golden light as the sun streams down all over your
body. You look down to the bottom of the pool and see brightly colored
pebbles. They glisten and sparkle like precious gems and jewels, and all at
once you feel wealthy, as if you had discovered secret treasures. You stand
beneath the waterfall, and, as it washes away all impurities from your being,
you feel clean, and renewed as never before.
You leave the pool and the very cells of your skin tingle, clean and alive
in the cool air. You dry yourself with your towel, dress, and proceed away
from the waterfall, mounting ever higher up the path. The breeze greets
your nose with a fragrance so sweet, you feel compelled to learn what
awaits you farther along the path. You climb steadily, and suddenly the path
opens onto a vast green meadow filled with dazzling wildflowers in full
bloom: oranges, reds, violets, pinks, whites, purples, yellows—all swaying
joyously in the breeze. You run through the meadow, the brilliant green
grass and flowers brushing against your legs, and you feel the warm sun
shining down on you. The meadow sweeps upward, and you arrive at the
crest of a peak. Your eyes behold panoramic vistas of rich green valleys,
majestic purple mountains, and a turquoise sky, resplendent with white and
rose pink clouds.
One of these rose pink clouds drifts near you, and you are enfolded in
its billowy, loving pink softness. You drift away with this cloud, up into the
sky, peacefully, higher and higher. The sun’s rays warm and bathe you in
the very essence of this deep rose pink light and love. This love and light
flow in a rich pink through your mind, your entire nervous system, your
entire physical body, and all around you on every side. This love enfolds
you. You’re feeling its healing power coursing through you, and opening
you up to receive greater love, greater peace, and greater joy than you have
ever known before.
The cloud now carries you gently back past the meadow, past the
waterfall. The cloud then becomes a pink parachute. This pink parachute
gently carries you back down to Earth. Gently, gently, it carries you as you

slowly drift down to the campsite where your adventure began. You breathe
deeply of the morning air once again, and you hold to the feeling, the
sensing, and the knowing of what you have experienced in the very heart of
your being, knowing that you are renewed. You are at peace, and you will
keep that deep peace, tranquility, and serenity with you throughout the
coming week.
Island Monastery
You are on a boat going to a tropical island. The water is a clear blue with
shades of brilliant emerald green. You disembark and walk across a
sparkling white sandy beach. The sand feels like velvet. As you walk, you
see a beautiful flower garden and walk into it. The flowers are in beautiful
hues and geometric shapes, vibrating their colors to you, enfolding you in
their splendor. There are many beautiful birds and animals in the garden.
They know you’re there and are happy to see you. Beautiful fruit trees also
send their vibrations to you. You are attracted to a particular tree that has a
profusion of fruit you’ve never seen before. You pick one of the fruits and
bring it to your lips. It’s the most delicious morsel you’ve ever tasted! You
are energized by its very flavor. You now move through the garden and
realize that you are walking on a brilliant golden path that goes straight up a
mountainside. You seem to be gliding effortlessly as you walk the golden
path, climbing up the mountain.
Off in the distance, you see a monastery. You climb effortlessly toward
it. As you approach, you hear bells chiming—beautiful tones—and you
sense an atmosphere of power and light. You approach the monastery and
go through the outer gate. This is like no monastery you’ve ever seen. It’s
large, with several white buildings, and filled with radiant gardens and
fountains. There are brilliant colors everywhere. A monk greets you,
dressed in golden robes. No words are spoken, yet there is a sense of love
between you and the monk, and you understand each other perfectly. You
see the grounds, and buildings of many rooms. The monk lets you wander
through the halls on your own. You walk into one of the rooms and see
paintings and sacred manuscripts. In a courtyard are enticing, multicolored
fountains. You take your clothes off and step lightly into one of the

fountains. The water seems to be made of pure light, moving in
indescribable symmetrical formations. You are in awe of the beauty.
You step out of the fountain feeling refreshed and put on a magnificent
white robe that has been placed on a bench just for you. You then see a
circular glass building. You wonder how you’ll get in. You don’t see a door.
The monk appears next to you and places his hand on a panel of glass; the
glass slides open and you enter. The monk vanishes again. You walk to the
center of this huge circular room. There is a circle of violet living light and
a golden chair within that circle. You sit in the chair and feel the energies of
the room. Your thoughts and feelings keep rising higher and higher. You
look around and admire a magnificent golden dome above you. And as
you’re looking, a beautiful flow of light from the dome encompasses your
entire being, establishing that flow of spiritual light deep within you. The
light flows in different colors and seems to be exactly what you need. Then
the light stops flowing from the dome. The violet circle that you are sitting
in starts rising up all around you, a flame of life-energizing light
surrounding your entire being and reaching all the way up to the golden
dome. You stay in that flow for a few moments but feel like you could stay
there forever. The flame subsides, and you leave the glass building. The
monk guides you out of the monastery and down the mountainside. You end
up at the boat that brought you to this beautiful place. You say good-bye to
the monk, get in the boat, and sail away feeling completely refreshed and
revitalized.
Plantation Setting
See yourself wearing a beautiful pink robe, sandals, and belt. You are
walking along a gorgeous pathway of pure white light. On both sides of you
are nothing but flowers. On the right side are warm colors of pink, red,
orange, and yellow; on the left are cooler shades of green, blue, and violet.
As you come up the path, you are met by a beautiful white horse. You
mount that horse and immediately feel its tremendous spirit, life, and
strength. It seems to know exactly where it is going and begins galloping in
a flowing rhythm. You feel the breeze blowing through your hair and you
feel a thrilling sense of freedom. The horse takes you through a green
meadow and, as you ride, it gets greener and greener.

The horse takes you to a pillared mansion that looks like it belongs on a
Southern plantation. You get off the horse and go up the steps into the
mansion. No one is around. You think to yourself that this is one of the most
beautiful homes you have ever seen. You walk inside, and the interior is
even more beautiful. You’re immediately drawn to a spiral staircase. You
ascend to the second floor, which has a long corridor. There are six rooms
to the right and six rooms to the left. You go to the first door on the right
and enter. The room is huge, lavishly furnished with Louis XIV furniture.
The bedspread is a beautiful light blue with little yellow flowers
embroidered around its edges. You go to a magnificent bay window, and by
that window is an ornamental golden chair, which faces a wall. On that wall
is a very large painting.
You sit and study the painting. Your eyes are at once drawn to its focal
point—a beautiful emerald green stream. It’s very refreshing to look at.
Alongside it are trees and little animals scurrying among the rocks. The sun
seems to be directly overhead, in its full glory, rays streaming down. As
you’re looking at all the different things in the painting, suddenly the stream
begins to move and become alive. You can feel the rays of the sun and you
become one with that light. As you feel that flow enveloping and lifting
you, you suddenly find that you have entered the picture and are walking by
the water. You pick a spot that calls to you and sit by a rock, looking at the
stream.
As you’re sitting there, a beautiful ray of white light beams down on
you, touching into the very center of your being. You drink deeply of this
light, feeling yourself becoming more and more elevated. Then every home
you have ever lived in starts flashing through your mind. You feel this light
touching into every one of those homes, releasing any unhappy experiences
or memories and establishing the radiance of this light in each of them. You
feel thankful for what the light is doing. Then you feel another flow of this
light touching into every vibration and every person who has ever lived
with you in those homes, enfolding them in this light and lifting their
spirits. Then the light fades. You feel like a new person. You get up and start
walking by the stream, again sensing the sun sending you strength and love.
All at once you’re back in the bedroom, sitting in the golden chair. Through
the window you can see the horse waiting for you. You bid farewell to the
room, descend the spiral staircase, pass through the entrance, and get back
on the horse. It takes you back to the path of white light where you first

began your journey. Once again, you feel completely refreshed and
revitalized.


CHAPTER 18
AFFIRMA TIONS AND VISUALIZATIONS
AFFIRMATIONS AND VISUALIZATIONS are two very effective spiritual practices
that we can employ to accentuate our spiritual energy work. Not only do
these work well by themselves, but used in conjunction with the light, their
effect is enormously amplified.
Affirmations
The late nineteenth and beginning of the twentieth century saw the
blossoming of a spiritual movement called New Thought or, as William
James called it, “the Religion of Healthy-Mindedness.” The philosophy
behind this movement is that our thinking has a direct impact on the quality
of our lives, and that by changing our thinking, we can change any aspect of
our life. Although we understand this philosophy much better today, at the
time it was first introduced such thinking was revolutionary. The famous
aphorism “Mind over matter” grew out of this movement. New Thought
attempted to show the spiritual dimensions of our thinking, and how by
using our mind in the proper way, we align ourselves with the divine
scheme of life. Pioneers such as Norman Vincent Peale, Ernest Holmes,
Charles Fillmore, and Thomas Troward were the forerunners of this
movement, and several very successful religious organizations grew around
it. Even today, New Thought is very much alive and continues to prosper
and grow.
One of the most effective tools New Thought employs to facilitate
mental change is the use of affirmations. The word “affirmation” comes
from the Latin word meaning “to strengthen.” The principle is that a strong

declarative statement can have the effect of reversing a negative belief or
attitude. For example, if you’re constantly telling yourself “I’m worthless,”
and really believe it, you probably have created some corresponding
negative condition in your life. By refusing that negative thought and
replacing it with a sincere, positive affirmation such as “I am a precious
child of God,” you can create a positive change in your life. Affirmations
follow the spiritual point of view that life works from the inside out. If
you’re already trying to focus on your positive qualities, affirmations can
help to keep your consciousness set on your desired goals.
Designing Your Affirmations
You can have a lot of fun with affirmations. Here are a few guidelines for
designing your own.
1. Word your affirmations as if they were already a reality. Your
affirmations need to be stated as whole and complete and in the present
time. For example, the affirmation “I am losing weight” isn’t nearly as
effective as “I am at my perfect weight.” By seeing yourself already at
the goal, you place the goal in the present, and that has the effect of
drawing the condition to you.
Use statements like “I am,” as they keep you focused in the
present. If you use tentative phrases such as “I will” or “I hope,”
there’s not much conviction there, and your affirmations will have far
less positive effect.
2. Avoid the word “not.” The words “not” and “never” are negations, not
affirmations. Your consciousness responds best to affirmations. Your
affirmation must be a positive declaration. You want to affirm what
you want—not what you don’t want. Instead of saying “I am not sick,”
for example, you would say “I am in perfect health,” or “I accept only
perfect health,” which are both affirmative statements.
3. Feel what you say. You have to really mean what you say; otherwise,
what’s the point? If you are just saying the words, there is no substance
to what you say. This needs to come from your heart. In designing
affirmations, find the truth and meaning for you before using them.

The Light and Affirmations
If you were sitting at a table in a noisy, busy diner and in a quiet, meek
voice asked the waitress or waiter for a cup of coffee, what do you suppose
would happen? How fast would you get that cup of coffee? Would you even
be heard amid all the noise and activity? You’d have to speak clearly and
strongly to be heard in such an atmosphere. Affirmations work in a very
similar way. If you repeat affirmations but put no power behind them, they
will have little meaning. You’ll become like a parrot, merely repeating
words with little understanding of what you’re saying. As a result, they will
not carry the force of conviction needed to affect your consciousness. If you
want an affirmation to have impact, it must have power and conviction
behind it. Your mental body is busy with many things, and you have to
impress it strongly for it to respond to you. We’re not talking decibels here;
I mean spiritual power and sincerity. By putting the Divine Light into an
affirmation, you give it far more power and authority. And perhaps most
important of all, by using the light with your affirmation, you’re infusing
the words with some of the divine essence of what you’re affirming.
You can call on the light to work with affirmations as a meditation in
itself or use them before or after your normal light work. Either way, begin
your Higher Self meditation as you normally would. If necessary, do a
mental cleansing with the light first to get your mind as clear as possible.
When you are in your Higher Self Point, bring down the pure white light to
touch into your mental body, quickening it in the light. You can also ask the
light to touch into your throat center as well.
Meditative Prayer for Affirmations
“Down-ray the pure white light into my Higher Self Point and into my
mental center to flow into my affirmations, giving power and conviction to
bring forth Thy divine results. Let this light also touch into my throat center,
quickening it in this Thy light, so that the affirmations spoken move out
with spiritual tone into the vibrated ethers.”

When you feel the light is established, start saying your affirmations.
Repeat each one three times, feeling the light touching into every word you
say. Declare your affirmation unequivocally. You don’t have to force it or
scream it out, but make it definite. Leave no room for your conscious or
subconscious mind to misinterpret what you’re saying. As you say the
words, see the light moving out with the verbalized thought from your
mental center. Hold to the knowing that that thought is now moving into the
spiritual ethers, putting into motion and manifesting the affirmation in your
life.
Examples of Affirmations
There are many fine examples of affirmations available today. It doesn’t
matter if you use your own or others as long as they work for you. I use
affirmations a great deal in my classes, because I find it’s one of the
quickest ways to unify a group of people and get them moving in a creative,
positive way. Below are thirty affirmations I have used with great effect.
1. I am perfect Health, Harmony, and Happiness.
2. I am perfect Power, Ability, and Success.
3. I am perfect Poise, Peace, and Plenty.
4. The kingdom of God, the glory of God, are here and now. I am forever
a part of its being.
5. The perfect law of God is now operating in my affairs.
6. I am free of strain, stress, and fear in my life.
7. I am in the presence of radiant joy, of Divine Love, and of perfect
power.
8. I know that I am drawing my good to me.
9. There is a silent power of attraction within me that is irresistible.
10. I am without worry about what happened yesterday. I know that today
everything is made new.
11. I let go of all sense of limitation and I take the hand of God. My Father
and I walk into the garden of Divine Love and everlasting light.

12. I give my full attention to the positive, creative, dynamic powers of
God, right here, right now. I erase all illusions and beliefs that
obstruction exists, and relax and establish divine order in me now.
13. The Divine Spirit of the Conquering Christ transcends all discord.
14. The Holy Presence of the Living God has full possession of this body
temple and is in complete charge.
15. My mind, body, and soul respond only to perfection, beauty, wisdom,
purity, and loving thoughts.
16. I give thanks that I am the ever-renewing, ever-unfolding expression of
infinite life, love, health, and energy.
17. Divine Love and wisdom go before me, making my way easy and
successful, for I am now guided, healed, prospered, and blessed.
18. My Father and I are One.
19. The light of love shines forth in me as new energy, new peace of mind,
new power and dominion, new poise, new beauty, new prosperity, new
harmony, and new good in every phase of my life.
20. Divine Love foresees everything and richly provides for me now.
21. The Spirit of God that dwells within me blesses my mind, heals my
body, and prospers my way.
22. The divine child of God knows only total freedom and the unlimited
life of the Eternal Being.
23. God is the creative principle of life, and I am one with all the creative
intelligence and wisdom of the Father.
24. My life is guided by divine intelligence.
25. My creative flow is magnificent and perfectly expressed.
26. I am prosperous beyond my wildest dreams.
27. I am open to give love and to receive love.
28. My energy is boundless and I am filled with vitality.

29. I have excellent motivation to fill each day fully with harmonious
thoughts, words, and deeds.
30. I release my past mistakes and the results of those mistakes.
Visualizations
The ability to visualize is one of the most important spiritual traits you
possess. You cannot create anything tangible if you have not first visualized
it in your mind’s eye. When you strongly imagine something, you make an
impression on the spiritual fabric of life. That impression has the effect of
moving toward materialization. If you back up this visualization through
application, it will eventually become a reality. Visualizations are actually
God’s attribute of divine sight acting in and through your mind. This power
of creative visualization exists at all levels of activity, from the simplest
creative acts to the greatest inventions or works of art. The universe itself
was created from an envisioned, divine idea. So when you are consciously
picturing in your mind a desire or a wish that you want fulfilled and
projecting that image into life, you are using the most powerful tools of
creative invention that exist.
Visualizations can accomplish wonderful things. There was a woman in
one of my classes who was not particularly metaphysical, but she really
caught on to the idea of visualizations. She was a real estate broker working
for a prestigious agency. She somehow knew that by working with the light
and visualizations, she could really build up her business. She began using
the turquoise ray and visualized that she was closing deals and that lots of
money was flowing in. She was so single-minded and diligent in her work
that within a few months she had doubled her sales, becoming her
company’s top producer.
Planning Your Visualization
To be effective in your visualization, carefully plan out what you wish to
visualize. The old saying “Be careful what you wish for because you just
might get it” is especially true when it comes to visualizations. If you’re not

thorough in planning your visualization, you might create something you
didn’t exactly want, or neglect to create something you do want.
I worked with a woman who was visualizing a new job. She was very
careful to construct exactly the kind of job she wanted, visualizing her
salary, exact duties, and even the hours she wanted to put in. Then, after
careful planning, she worked very hard to manifest the situation she
designed. She eventually did get the job she wished for and the salary she
wanted. But she’d left out one critical element that came back to haunt her
—harmony in the workplace. She was so concerned about the nature of the
work and the money, that she neglected to envision a congenial work
environment. She ended up working in a place where there was friction
from her boss and fellow workers. She eventually transferred to another
division, where things went much better, but she learned about designing a
well-rounded visualization.
God is always your partner in every constructive visualization you
create. After all, it’s God’s vision you’re calling on, God’s power you’re
using, and God’s spiritual fabric onto which you’re impressing this
visualization. An ancient spiritual teaching states
“God is the Doer, the Doing, and the Deed.”
A well-executed visualization is, in essence, tapping into the very creative
principle of God and the divine plan for you. With this understanding, begin
to plan your visualization. The first step is to determine a definite goal or
desire to be fulfilled. What exactly is it that you wish? What do you want to
bring forth? It should be constructive, honorable, and worthy of your time
and effort. Are you looking for a new job or trying to find a romantic
companion? Are you looking to buy a new car or house? Your visualization
can be as simple or elaborate as you choose.
Take a week to plan your visualization. Write down all your ideas of
what you want to create. By writing it down, you can look at it more
objectively and see if that’s what you really want. You can more easily add
or take things away. You want to make sure your list includes everything
you want. If you get stuck, work with divine guidance, asking, “Illuminate
me if there is anything I’ve left out.” Sometimes, the Higher Self will flash
in something you haven’t seen or thought of. You may be picturing all the

physical features of your visualization and forgetting the essentials, such as
peace, love, and joy.
When you are writing down your ideas, do not actually do the
visualization exercise yet. Once you have the ideas you want, organize your
thoughts and state your plan in words as concisely and clearly as possible.
Then you can begin the actual visualization. The following are some
guidelines for planning your visualization.
1. Be specific. The more specific you are, the better. For example, if
you’re looking to buy a new car, don’t just visualize a car. See the
specific make, model, and color if you can. If you’re unsure of the
exact thing you want, be very specific about the quality you want.
Many times, specific qualities are more important than anything else.
For example, if you’re looking for a companion, you don’t want to go
into physical features as much as the qualities you’re looking for in the
person. Perhaps you want that person to be kind, funny, exciting, etc.
This will help you get more clearly into the feeling of what you want.
2. Be realistic. Anything’s possible, but obviously the more outlandish
your visualization, the harder it will be to realize. If your goals are
doable, you’re going to see results much faster, creating more
excitement and drive. Just use common sense. However, there’s
nothing wrong with visualizing long-range goals. Just recognize this as
a plan that will take greater energy and time to manifest.
3. Watch your motive. Examine your motives for bringing such a
creation into expression. You must approach your work constructively.
If you’re thinking selfishly, you’re not going to connect with the God
vision and you’ll create problems for yourself and others. Your
visualization must be a win-win situation for all involved. This is why
in the meditative prayer you must include the phrase “according to
divine law and love for the good of all concerned.” By including that
phrase, you are making sure you’re putting things in God’s hands.
4. See yourself in the act of doing. Whatever you design, see it as
something finished, complete, perfect, and in the present. If you’re
visualizing a new car, see yourself driving that car. If you’re
visualizing a mate, see yourself with that person, having fun, laughing,
walking hand in hand. Or if you’re visualizing a new job, see yourself

already at that job. As with affirmations, you want your desiring to be
active, in the present tense.
5. Have complete faith. Before you start a visualization, it has to be with
complete faith in the inevitability of success. If it’s really part of God’s
design, how could it not come to pass? If you harbor fears, then you’ll
be projecting them, which is just the opposite of what you want. You’ll
be creating two antagonistic images and the result will be confusion.
6. Don’t put a time limit on it. This can be hard, especially when you’re
in desperate need. But once you do a visualization, you must let it go
and grow in God’s time. If you’ve done things right, the energy is in
motion and will eventually materialize, but you can’t dictate the exact
route it must take, or even have a preference as to how and when it
will come about. If, after a period of time, it still hasn’t come to pass,
you can reinforce the visualization, or reevaluate the situation.
7. Keep your visualization to yourself. I’ve seen more beautiful plans
knocked off course when people deflate and dilute the whole thing by
talking about it. A visualization needs time to grow, and if you talk
about it too much, you won’t be giving time for the spiritual energy to
accumulate, which will most likely neutralize the effectiveness of your
visualization.
The Light and Visualizations
As with affirmations, putting the light into your visualization makes it much
stronger. It also helps to keep your visualization constructive and in the
light of God’s will. The light accentuates God’s power, acting within your
consciousness to propel the picture you are projecting into your outer
world.
Use the Higher Self meditation to bring down the pure white light to
activate your visualization. You especially want the white light to touch into
your brain cells so that they’re receptive to the whole process.
Meditative Prayer for Visualizations

“Down-ray the pure white light into my mental body, charging and
recharging all levels of my consciousness, especially quickening my brain
cells. I ask the white light to give power and substance to the visualization I
am now projecting into the vibrated ethers that it may manifest according to
Thy divine law and love for the good of all concerned.”
Once you feel your connection with the light, begin your visualization.
Feel and sense that the white light is quickening and amplifying the power
of whatever you’re imagining and giving it life. See yourself actually doing
whatever you wish to create. Act it out in your mind. Really feel it already
happening for you. When your visualization is complete, hold to the
knowing that your visualization is now in motion according to divine will.
You can repeat the visualization periodically, but give time for the
visualization to blossom. If you do something to disturb that knowing,
simply repeat the visualization. If after a reasonable period of time it hasn’t
happened, then you can repeat the visualization, or reevaluate your plan.


CHAPTER 19
FASHION AND COLOR
WHILE IN HIGH SCHOOL, I was doing my best to lead a “normal life.”
Metaphysics was little understood then and, from experience, I found it best
not to tell people of my clairvoyant gifts. Yet these talents were blossoming
in miraculous ways, and I was receiving regular inspiration from the
spiritual realms. My understanding of how to work with spiritual energy
deepened, including developing an understanding of the role the aura
played in health.
It was during this time that I discovered the colors I wore in my clothing
made an impact on the aura. As the fifth of six children, with two older
sisters, and growing up in the Depression era, I wore hand-me-downs
throughout my childhood. Until I got older I really didn’t have much of a
say in what I wore. But as I was learning more about the aura, I saw that
there was a correlation between the spiritual color energies, with their
various interpretations, and physical colors of similar hues and saturation.
For example, wearing something bright red had the effect of attracting the
auric energies of vitality. Wearing pink could draw in more of the loving
spiritual energies. This wasn’t in every instance, but even if it didn’t bring
in the exact color correlation, it still had this aura-enhancing effect.
In the same way, wearing dark colors that reflected the unenlightened
energies tended to detract from the aura. Wearing dark browns, blacks, and
grays often had a dampening effect on the aura, depending on the situation.
I started dressing in brighter colors and in a way that better reflected the
colors of my aura and it had a definite positive effect.
In this chapter, I would like to complement your light work by offering
suggestions as to colors to dress in for various situations that would
strengthen and enhance your aura. You may ask, “How does physical color
make a difference if the aura is not physical?” First, I am not talking about

fashion in the sense of colors that match skin tones or seasons of the year.
I’m also not speaking of chromotherapy. This is the fascinating study of the
healing effects of physical light and colors on the human body, a practice
that goes back to ancient times. In exploring the effects that colors in the
physical spectrum have on consciousness and the aura, we are stepping into
the psychological and metaphysical arena.
The spiritual effect of color is based on the similar principles of
reflective meditation and visualizing the spiritual energies you are calling
on. One of the secrets of consciousness is that “you are where you place
your attention.” In your light meditations, by placing your attention on the
color of the energy ray you are requesting, you are helping to draw that
energy to you. The color acts as a door to the consciousness of the energy.
For example, by vividly visualizing pink, that can have the effect of helping
to tune you into the actual spiritual power of the love ray. You don’t need to
be clairvoyant to effectively visualize color.
This spiritual effect of color also calls into play another aspect of our
being—the unconscious. The unconscious (not to be confused with the
subconscious mind, which is the seat of memory) is a primal part of us that
deals with aspects of mind that are not readily accessible to the conscious
mind. This is the mind that expresses unrecognized desires, wants, fear,
hopes, and dreams. It is the aspect of mind that can be irrational, wild, and
unpredictable. This mind expresses itself in sometimes unexpected ways
and can be accessed through the dream state, through symbols and mythic
imagery, as well as certain meditative states.
Since by definition the unconscious mind is processing and interpreting
information below the conscious level, there can be more freedom with its
expression. This is why in a dream anything can happen and even the most
bizarre happenings can seem normal and acceptable until we awaken back
to our conscious mind. When we visualize or wear a physical color, it
interplays with the unconscious mind. Your unconscious awareness of color
has the effect of attracting that corresponding spiritual energy to you. One
beauty of wearing color as a tool to spiritually strengthen your aura is you
don’t have to think about it. The positive effects are working for you
automatically.
In the aura, the effects of the colors you wear can be clairvoyantly seen.
They usually affect the mental and Hermetic centers. When you wear bright
colors that reflect the enlightened energies of the aura, beautiful radiations

come out of the mental and/or Hermetic center. These radiations are
somewhat delicate and to the untrained clairvoyant eye can be mistaken for
mental active emanation. But in fact they represent the consciousness
reacting to the environment. This helps to uplift the aura.
In the same way, when you wear dark, unenlightened colors, this can
have the effect of detracting from the auric power. This is most often seen
in the Hermetic center. While wearing dark colors doesn’t usually attract
that type of energy (although it can if the intention is strong), what it can do
is weaken some of the Hermetic rays, which can detract from most
effectively expressing yourself spiritually. It can create a discouraging,
draining effect on the consciousness.
In the spirit world, color is very important. The spiritual dimensions of
life are full of color and majesty. Angelic beings wear robes of living colors
that have great impact on the work they do. You are recognized by your
light rays just as you are by your form and appearance. You are a light
being, so why not surround yourself with color?
When it comes to wearing clothing of certain colors to enhance your
aura, there are two ways to go. You can wear colors that reflect the
enlightened aspects of your consciousness. For example, if you feel loving,
wearing pink will enhance that feeling. Or you can go the other way and
wear a color reflecting an energy you feel you need. So if you are feeling
lonely or sad, wearing pink in this instance can help pick up your spirits.
We all have colors that we like to wear and that seem to “agree” with us.
Sometimes they fall in the enlightened range, sometimes not. If you notice
you wear a lot of the darker shades, it’s time to start adding color. It’s also a
good idea to add variety to your wardrobe. If you see you wear mostly blues
and greens, for example, bring in some other colors. As in life, variety is
good and creates excitement.
Wearing Blue
Blue is a wonderful color to wear in many situations. The rich sapphire blue
is an excellent color to wear when you need healing, as it can help attract
the healing energies to you and help keep your mind focused on health. The
bright peacock blue (also called the electric blue) is the color to wear when
you are engaged in creative activities. I was lecturing at a children’s acting

camp once. These were really smart kids and many of them were already
working in the motion picture industry. I was amazed at how receptive they
were to the idea of the aura. After I told them that electric blue was the
color of talent in the aura, the teacher of the camp told me that the next day,
half the kids came in wearing bright blue!
The deep royal blue is good to wear when you need more strength and
determination, such as at your job. Wearing this color can help keep you
steady, especially if others are trying to pull you in different directions. It’s
a good color to wear when in a leadership role. The royal blue is excellent
when interacting with friends and family, as it brings out your devotion and
loyalty.
Wearing light, powder blue is excellent when engaged in creative
pursuits and trying to feel more inspired. It can help you gain fresh insight
and outlook on things. If the blue goes more to a sea blue, this has a
calming, soothing effect on the consciousness. It’s good to wear when you
want to relax.
The indigo is an interesting color to wear. It’s not always easy to find a
true indigo color in clothing. Many physical shades that are called indigo
are really a blue-black, sometimes mixed in with other dark colors. This is
not really indigo; it’s more of what is called the “moody blue,” which is a
depressing energy in the aura. The true indigo color could be a very deep
blue or blue-purple. This is a good color to wear if you’re going through a
difficult situation. It’s helpful when starting a new project and trying to
break through challenges and apparent obstacles.
Wearing Red
As you might imagine, red is a stimulating color. All the brighter shades of
red work well. Wearing this color vitalizes the energy field. If you are doing
something athletic and physically strenuous, this is an excellent color to
wear. In the same way, if you are tired or fatigued, wearing this color can
help pick up your energy levels. Wearing red clothing can build up your
stamina when engaged in activities that require sustained effort over time. If
you have come out of an illness and still don’t feel like you have your full
strength back, this is an excellent color to wear.

It also has the effect of stimulating other people. If you are with a group
of people doing an activity together, wearing red can help. It’s helpful when
other people have to be active with you. Red is the color of passion, so it is
a good energy color to wear in romantic situations to help create
excitement. Be careful not to wear red when you need to sleep or relax, as it
can be overstimulating.
Wearing Pink
Pink is generally thought of as a woman’s color, yet from the point of view
of the aura, it’s one of the most uplifting colors to wear for both men and
women. This color will help bring out your loving nature, especially if you
are shy or hold back too much from expressing your feelings to others. If
you are lonely or feel uncared for, wearing something pink can help you
feel more nurtured and cared for. It’s one of the best colors to wear when
engaging in relationships with others. Even wearing this in the workplace
can help encourage better cooperation among coworkers.
Of course it is the color to wear when in a romantic relationship or if
you wish to attract a romantic partner. In a similar way, it’s excellent to
wear in interacting with friends and family and it can help attract new
people into your life. Wear this color if you are in a depression and wish to
pick up your spirits. It can bring you into a more joyful state of mind, more
hopeful and optimistic.
Wearing Green
Bright greens are often associated with nature and renewal, depending on
the shade. This is an important color to wear in a variety of situations. It is a
stabilizing and centering color. If you are feeling too busy doing all sorts of
things, or feeling you are out of rhythm in your life, wearing bright emerald
green can bring you into divine balance and upliftment.
Like the pink, green is excellent for relationships. If you don’t feel
comfortable wearing pink, you can wear a nice bright shade of green to
encourage healthy, harmonious relationships. It encourages cooperation. If

there have been disagreements or if you find yourself in the middle of a
dispute between two people, wearing green can help to resolve those
situations and find the common ground. Wearing the deeper shade of kelly
green can help stimulate financial abundance. This is similar to the color
turquoise. Yet, whereas turquoise is abundance in any aspect of life, kelly
green is especially good in money matters. Green can also be a healing and
relaxing color to wear.
Wearing Orange
Not many people wear this color and that’s too bad because it has a lot of
benefits from the point of view of the aura. Like the red tones, orange is a
very enlivening and uplifting color to wear. If you are very athletic, wearing
both the orange and the red will get you as stimulated as you can get from
the color of clothes you wear. The two are a great combination. Wearing
orange can help you get motivated to start or finish a project you are
working on, especially if you have been procrastinating. It brings out your
ambitious nature to be successful at what you do. If you’re feeling
discouraged, wear something orange to pick up your spirits. It’s a very good
color to wear when you are in the midst of reorganizing your office or
home. Similar to the red, orange is a very lively, active color. Think of it as
a sunshine color.
Wearing White
Wearing white generates some of the most diverse effects in the aura.
Depending how you wear this color it can have a neutral effect—neither
supportive nor detractive. But when you wear it with spiritual intention, it
serves many functions.
White is one of the most uplifting colors to wear. Think of it like being
lifted up in a white cloud out of cares and worries. As with the energy in the
aura, white can help you see things from the higher perspective, especially
if you feel you’ve been too enmeshed in your concerns. White brings in
holiness and purity. When you want to feel closer to the divine, closer to

God, wear this color. It helps bring in a redemptive quality as well. If
you’ve done something that was not so good, wearing white can help you
get out of that state of mind so you are more motivated to correct whatever
was done. It brings in the energy of idealism to live to one’s highest
standards. It helps to stimulate the connection with your higher nature. It’s
excellent to wear if you have been feeling compromised, violated,
slandered, or misrepresented, so you don’t absorb those energies.
There is a wonderful unifying effect to wearing white. However, be
careful of wearing white in situations where others are not in so good a
place spiritually, as it can make them feel uncomfortable. There can be a
restful quality to this color as well. It’s good to wear white if you are having
trouble sleeping.
Wearing Yellow
Since it is difficult to find gold clothing without going to metallic colors,
bright yellow can be used for the spiritual qualities of both yellow and gold.
Yellow is a stimulating color, similar to the reds and oranges. It’s an
excellent color to wear when teaching or learning new things. If you are
studying for a test, wear this color to help stay focused. If you feel
“scattered” in your thinking and feeling, wearing this color can help you
feel centered and together. If you notice you have a very short attention
span, losing interest too quickly, wearing yellow will help focus the
consciousness.
Yellow, like the gold, is a dynamic, outgoing energy. If you are feeling
fearful, or if you are procrastinating or hesitating about something, wearing
this color will help you get out of that frame of mind and be more outgoing
and willing to take chances. This is a good color to wear for more
willpower when feeling wishy-washy. It’s excellent for decision making—
anything that requires dynamic activity. Combining yellow with other
dynamic colors will help you be even more outgoing.
Wearing Purple

Purple is a magnificent color to wear. When seen in the aura to a marked
degree, it indicates an advanced soul. No wonder purple has been associated
with regality. It centers you and helps to keep you in the divine oneness. It’s
the color to wear when you need deep rest and relaxation. If you are
nervous or anxious about something, this energy will calm you down; it is
powerful yet restful. It’s excellent when the nervous system has been
overworked. If you’ve been putting in a lot of extra hours at work, wearing
purple can soothe and relax the nervous system. Purple is the color to wear
when overcoming grief, such as following the death of a loved one. If you
are having trouble sleeping, try wearing something purple to help get you in
the mood to sleep.
Wearing Mixed Colors
It is interesting that in the electromagnetic spectrum, the colors of visible
light are continuous from one wavelength to the next. Reds are in the area
of longer wavelengths, then, moving through the spectrum, you work your
way to the purples, which are shorter, or “higher,” wavelengths. But when it
comes to the human eye, there are three basic receptors that pick up certain
wavelengths of light then combine those impulses to produce our
perception of physical color. Mirroring this process, there are the primary
colors, which can be additive (as in adding different colors of light to
produce other colors) or subtractive (as in mixing primary colors of paint to
produce secondary colors). Mixing primary colors can produce a great
variety of color choices.
In the spiritual spectrum of Divine Light, spiritual energies that are a
combination of more than one color do share certain similarities to physical
light but there are unique differences. Remember, Divine Light is a conduit
of consciousness, so energy rays that bring in more than one color dynamic
are not simply a combination of two or more colors. There is a unique
consciousness or divine attribute placed in that light that is all its own.
For example, the apple green ray of spiritual growth is a combination of
the emerald green ray of balance and the golden ray of wisdom. Yet the
apple green ray is not simply balanced wisdom; it’s a unique attribute all its
own.

The following colors reflect spiritual energies that have this blending of
power but also their own unique attributes. They are excellent to wear to
help create more dynamic energy in the aura.
Turquoise
This blue-green color is excellent to wear when you wish to attract
prosperity in all forms. It may be a prosperity of material needs, ideas,
friendship, opportunities, health, or any number of things. I recommend
wearing turquoise jewelry to further cultivate a climate of abundance. If
you have been worried about supply, or others around you are in a poverty
consciousness, wearing turquoise can help keep you in your own center of
divine wealth.
Apple Green
This color helps with creating a feeling of new beginnings, a fresh start.
Wearing this color is very good when starting a new project or wanting to
feel more connected to your spiritual self. Similar to the sea blue, it has a
calming effect on the aura.
Coral
This is an unusual energy, not often seen in the aura. It brings in the deep
rose pink and the bright orange, with more pink than orange. This is an
excellent color to wear when you are trying to bring people together in a
common activity. It helps to engage people, especially for activities of a
personal nature. A group of people enjoying each other’s company is one of
the joys of life and wearing this color can help create that loving
atmosphere.
Chartreuse
This spiritual energy brings in the emerald green and the lemon yellow ray.
I often see this power ray in the Hermetic center. It is a type of balancing

power. It’s strong and has an energetic, bouncy quality. It helps make you
more assertive and expressive. Wearing this color will help you be more
outgoing. It’s a good color to wear to a dance or social occasion where you
are meeting people for the first time. It has an attractive quality and can
help draw people to you. This color is an alternative to the emerald green
when you are looking for more balance.
Tangerine
This is another color that is not worn often, but has a very uplifting effect in
the aura. Similar to the coral, tangerine brings in the pink and orange
energies. But in this case there is more orange than pink. This is an
excellent color to wear when coming out of a depression or a difficult
situation. It is an inspiring color to wear and promotes a feeling of well-
being.
Amber
This color is especially popular with amber jewelry. Wearing this color has
a very uplifting effect in the aura. It shares qualities with yellow and
orange. If you feel blah, dull, or bored, wearing this color can lighten you
up; it brings in dynamic power.
Wearing Neutral Colors
Some colors do not support or detract from the aura. You might say these
are “safe” colors, spiritually speaking. Having these colors in your
wardrobe is fine, especially if you are in a situation where wearing brighter
colors is discouraged. These neutral colors include various light tans (as
long as it does not go to the darker “mustard yellow”) and very light grays.
Clear brown is an interesting color. (This is not the dark cocoa brown
discussed in Chapter 3.) Clear brown in the aura indicates an earthy person.
It is not an unenlightened color but not exactly one of the enlightened
colors, either. It’s also not a neutral color because it has an effect in the

aura. This color can be good to wear when you feel like you need spiritual
grounding.
Wearing Dark Colors
I remember speaking to a group of students at a fashion institute about the
impact color has on the consciousness. These were ambitious students and
they were fascinated by the idea of the aura and its colors. I went down a
list of colors and their effects. When I got to the part about how wearing
black can detract from the aura, there was a silence in the room. Most were
wearing black and I don’t think they wanted to hear that!
I get a lot of questions about wearing colors that reflect the
unenlightened energies of the aura. I have to remind people that I’m not
speaking as a fashion expert and not trying to offend anyone who likes
wearing these colors. I’m speaking of the spiritual effects of color and can
only express what I see and let each person come to his or her own
conclusions. I have almost no dark colors in my wardrobe. People buying
me gifts know that I simply won’t wear something that falls into the darker
ranges. I’m too sensitive to their vibration.
As we explored, dark, gloomy colors can detract from the aura. And all
colors can reveal aspects about a person. I like to joke, “Don’t buy a car
from someone wearing avocado green—that person will try and cheat you!”
I’m being humorous, but there is some truth in that often we wear colors
that reflect our character. So, speaking metaphysically, you want to be
wearing the brighter colors. Yet there are situations where you won’t have a
choice and there are situations where wearing dark colors can be spiritually
appropriate.
Intention does make a difference. When wearing black as a minister or
priest might wear it, it is a sign of respect and humbleness, as is the brown
of the monk or renunciant. Dark colors can be viewed as conservative
colors indicating someone who isn’t boastful or self-centered. Many
uniforms include dark colors, and the people wearing them have little
choice. And of course if you are an actor, wearing gloomy colors may be
perfect for the character you are playing.
Fortunately you can work with the Divine Light to counteract any
negative effect dark colors might be having on your aura. The following is a

meditative prayer to use when in a situation where you find yourself with
little choice as to the colors you wear. It is recommended that when you are
out of that situation or back at home, you change clothing to the brighter
shades.
Meditative Prayer to Bless Clothing with the White Light
“Down-ray the pure white light to my spiritual energy centers and all levels
of my consciousness to counteract any negative effects the clothing I wear
might be having on my aura. I ask that this light go to my unconscious to
uplift me in Thy holy light. May my clothes be filled with the white light to
saturate them with the divine vibrations.”
Now, there are situations where wearing very dark colors can actually
work for you. This would be where there is a lot of discord around you and
essentially you want to detract those energies from yourself. And in some
situations wearing bright clothing will make you stand out too much,
especially if the people around you are not in a good place spiritually. In
these cases, you want to cloak yourself so you do not become a spiritual
target. It’s a little like wearing spiritual armor. If you are in a job where
difficult situations are going on beyond your control, or you are dealing
with souls who are not in a strong vibration spiritually, wearing dark colors
can be appropriate. When you do this, be discerning. Separate yourself from
the colors you wear.
Color in Your Home and at Work
The auric effect of color extends beyond clothing to colors in the home and
workplace. Your surroundings affect your consciousness and thereby affect
your aura. Creating beauty in your surroundings helps to enhance the aura.
Disturbing surroundings can detract from the aura unless you take the time
to counteract that effect, which you can do with the Divine Light. You are a
being of great color and vitality. Strive to fill your world with color.

When designing color in your home, keep the spiritual understanding of
color in mind. The gentle, soothing colors, such as violets, pinks, sea
greens, and powder blues, can be very relaxing for your bedroom. The
brighter colors, like reds, yellows, and oranges, might work well in your
kitchen or dining room or family room. More neutral colors such as white
might work well in the living room where people congregate with their
many different energies. But even here, color can work wonders to help
bring people together. Yellow is great for an office or study room.
Your car and office are two other areas where you may have control.
Depending on the kind of work you do, pick colors that reflect that type of
profession. If you are an artist or doctor, you’ll definitely want the blues
somewhere in your office. If you are scientific, the yellows and white will
be very good. If you are interacting with people a great deal, a hint of the
greens will help bring people together. Combine them with other brighter
colors that can encourage activity. A banker or financier would do well to
have kelly green or turquoise in his or her profession surroundings.
Of course, these are all just suggestions. The possibilities are endless.
As you work with your aura and colors, you will discover an incredible
world and a new spiritual support system.


CHAPTER 20
CRYSTALS, CANDLES, AND MEDITATION
CRYSTALS AND CANDLES ARE wonderful tools for enhancing your Higher Self
meditations (but not replace your work with the light). They have the ability
to create a conducive atmosphere for your meditation practice and amplify
the spiritual power you receive. They’re especially useful when you need
extra power or are having trouble concentrating during meditation. I have
been applying these two tools for many years and know how much they can
help in working with Divine Light when properly used.
Let’s start by looking at how to use crystals in your meditations to
enhance your aura and how the Divine Light reaches you. Crystal
gemstones have their own identity and aura. Remember, everything has an
aura, including crystals. You will be working with crystals primarily with
your spiritual centers. As you know, each center has its own function and
intelligence. As you work with gemstones, you will better tune into your
chakra points.
How do crystals help in working with your aura? First, let us understand
what we mean when we use the term crystals (or crystal gemstones).
Crystals are minerals, so when we are working with crystals, we are
working with elements of the mineral kingdom—a powerful ally in our
spiritual work. The term crystal refers to its crystalline, molecular
configuration. If you look at a crystal under the microscope, it has flat
surfaces that meet at regular angles. These can be beautifully similar to the
crystalline loveliness of snowflakes.
Certain crystals have piezoelectric properties, which basically means
they can help change one form of energy into another. For example, when
we speak into a microphone, the microphone is taking sound energy and
changing it into electrical signals. Many microphones use quartz crystals to
do this. The speaker then changes that electrical signal into sound waves so

we can hear it. This is the piezoelectric effect. In a similar way, the spiritual
properties of crystals—even though they are physical—act as a focal point
for receiving spiritual energy, which is what makes them so effective during
meditation.
In my many years of working with crystals, I have found that some
work better than others at conducting spiritual energy, and that not all
crystals work with all spiritual powers. Some types of spiritual energy
cannot be conducted through crystals and can only come in through the
meditative process we have been working with.
I recommend the following crystal gemstones to support your aura
meditations:
1. Rose quartz – Deep rose pink ray
2. Purple amethyst – Purple ray, violet ray
3. Snow quartz – White light
4. Blue sodalite – Blue-white fire
5. Green aventurine – Emerald green
6. Yellow citrine – Gold, lemon yellow
7. Hematite – Silver ray
8. Red jasper – Carnation red, ruby red
9. Clear crystal – to ground your crystal meditation work or as a
replacement if you don’t have the above-mentioned crystals
Preparing and Caring for Crystals
Crystals come in all shapes and sizes. You don’t want them too big or too
small. Ideally, tumbled stones are best—as high quality as you can get with
no cracks or nicks. The ideal size is around 1½ inches. It’s good to have a
place to store them when not in use such as a carrying pouch with
individual pockets so that the stones aren’t touching each other. A small
jewelry box can also work.
If you are getting them for the first time, pick ones you have an affinity
for. Soak them overnight in water. Then take each stone, one at a time, and

hold it in your left hand while holding your right hand about six inches
above it. Ask the white light to down-ray from your right hand to bless the
stone, demagnetize it from any vibrations that are not of the divine, and re-
magnetize it to your vibration. Feel yourself communicating with the stone.
Do this with each crystal. Once completed, it’s important that other people
not touch your crystals as you have set them to your vibration!
Meditating with Your Crystals
Once you have prepared your crystals, you are ready to use them in
meditation. There are a couple of ways to do this. Remember that crystals
are not a replacement for the meditation process; they complement the
process, and you won’t use crystals every time you meditate. But let’s say
you’ve had a long day and it’s a little hard to focus during your meditation.
Working with crystals can provide that extra spiritual support when you
need it.
After you’ve decided which spiritual rays you are going to work with,
pick the associated crystals. Maybe you are going to work with the emerald
green ray in your Hermetic center and the deep rose-pink ray in the
emotional center. You would take out the green aventurine and the rose
quartz along with the clear quartz. Leave the clear quartz resting on your
lap as a type of grounding energy. After you raise your consciousness and
are ready to bring down the light, hold the green aventurine on your
Hermetic center, right hand on top of left. Call on the emerald green ray
using the meditative prayer. As you envision the emerald green flowing to
your Hermetic center, envision some of that power first going through the
crystal and then into your heart center. This will increase the power you
receive.
When you’ve established that connection, gently put down the
aventurine. Now hold the rose quartz, right hand on top of left, over your
emotional center (near the navel). Call on the deep rose-pink ray to bless
your emotional center using the meditative prayer you have chosen. As you
envision the power flowing into your emotional center, envision some of
that energy first connecting with the rose quartz and then going into your
emotional center, which will increase the spiritual power you receive. When

you finish with the deep rose-pink meditation, put down the rose quartz and
give your thanks as you normally do.
Lighting Candles in Meditation
Candles have been a part of metaphysical heritage since ancient days. In the
rites and rituals of the mystical traditions, candles were prominently used.
While crystals can amplify the spiritual power flowing into your chakras
and aura, candles complement this process by helping to create a supportive
environment when you are meditating.
When you meditate, you are in a particular place, such as your bedroom,
living room or meditation room. You might be meditating outside.
Wherever you are meditating, energies will be flowing. They may or may
not be of a high quality. As you’ve learned, during your meditation practice
you are opening your consciousness to receive from the divine. So you want
the place you are meditating to be in an energy flow that supports you.
Candles can create the right mood for such spiritual work. When used with
understanding and reverence, candles possess spiritual power. The divine
will use your meditation candle as a conduit for connecting with spiritual
power. How does the candle do this? Of course, the candle is not doing this
on its own. While candles have their own spiritual power, it is the divine
blessing the candles have that give them their power. Candles are a signal to
the divine that you are seeking assistance.
The key component of a candle is the flame. Fire is one of the most
mystical elements in nature. We understand the chemical process that
generates a flame, but there is a spiritual component as well. This
component is spiritual fire. As Divine Light permeates creation, a spiritual
fire permeates it as well. That cosmic fire counterpart is in the flame itself,
and the divine uses it to transmit Divine Light. When you light a candle
with spiritual intention and reverence, you are requesting the divine to
infuse that candle with divine power. The power infused in the candle will
permeate the space you are meditating in, which helps create an atmosphere
that will make your meditations more effective. The color of the candles
you use as well as their placement and configuration all affect the power
candles can provide.

Choosing Candles
For purposes of meditation, it doesn’t matter the type of candle material you
use: paraffin, clarified paraffin, soy, or bee’s wax. (Bee’s wax is wonderful
but expensive and limited in colors.) It also doesn’t matter if it’s a column,
taper, or glass candle as long as the flame is clearly visible. Votive candles
usually generate too small a flame and burn out quickly. You want a candle
with vibrant colors, ideally in the wax itself and not in a glass container.
Electric, flameless candles are beautiful but are not real flames and do not
have spiritual value.
Demagnetizing Bowl
When you meditate with candles, it’s a good idea to have a large bowl of
water next to them to act as a “demagnetizer.” Water has strong healing
effects. During meditation, black and gray atoms are ejected from the aura
and from the room. The demagnetizing bowl of water helps to collect these
unenlightened energies and clear the room you are in. After the meditation
is over and you blow out the candles, throw out the water and wash out the
bowl.
Using Candles in Meditation
Light a candle five-to-ten minutes before beginning your meditation. Keep
it burning during the meditation and a little while after it’s over. When you
blow out the candles, throw out the water in the demagnetizing bowl. Do
not leave candles unattended! Some people like to light candles as a vigil
for someone. This is fine, but if you do, keep the lit candle in a sink or tub
so if it tips or spills, you are safe.
There are many ways to use candles. The simplest is to light one or two
candles related to the work you’re doing. If you are going to work with the
peace ray, for example, light a purple candle. If you’re doing a strong
purification, light an orange and blue candle, and so on. If you don’t have
the color candle you need, you can always use white.

In addition, use candles in a triangle formation to amplify the power. If
you are doing a strong healing meditation, a triangle formation is very
effective. This is especially good for cleansing your home. (See Chapter 16
for how to spiritually clean your home). Occasionally, there will be times
when you want to light candles in a foundation formation. This means
lighting four candles in the shape of a square or rectangle. This is especially
good for extreme situations where a lot of power is necessary, such as
shocking experiences, tragedies, traumas and such. You can use any color
combinations you feel you need, but this formation is very effective in such
conditions.


CHAPTER 21
PARTING THOUGHTS
IT HAS BEEN MY privilege and pleasure to bring forth the knowledge
contained in these pages. I hope I’ve instilled in you an enthusiasm to
change your life and shown that you have a glorious and divine potential.
You are more precious in God’s eyes than you can imagine. It is said that if
one person were missing from creation, the universe would be incomplete.
You are indispensable in the grand plan of life no matter how vast that plan
is. In this great adventure, your aura and the spiritual light are true friends
you can always rely on, and they are the mainspring of your life’s activities
and endeavors.
Life cannot stay in the status quo. Activity and change are inevitable.
The question is not whether life will change but how life will change. The
answer to this question is entirely up to you. If you treat life laxly, you
won’t get much out of it and your progress will be slow. Be bold and take
chances. As growth opportunities arise, take advantage of them as best you
can.
You are the aura you radiate. When you leave this Earth and move into
the hereafter, you’re going to leave with the aura you’ve earned. If your life
hasn’t been the best, you’re not going to suddenly come into a beautiful,
saintly aura. You’re going to be exactly who you are, so you need to start
improving your aura right here and now. Aim to leave this life with a better
aura than the one you entered with by continuously building your light
through your good thoughts, words, and actions. The light you accumulate
will give you a spiritual wealth beyond measure, a wealth that can never be
taken from you.
Be alert. The world is a very active place today, and you need to keep
your mind keen and razor sharp. Just as there are greater opportunities to
grow than ever before, there are also more temptations and distractions that

will only steer you away from your true destiny and delay your progress.
Take advantage of your spiritual knowledge and awareness to live life
according to the highest ideals you can imagine. Recognize that everything
you do makes a difference to you and to everyone in the world, for better or
for worse. It doesn’t matter if your deeds go recognized or unrecognized by
others. God sees your actions, and those actions are registered in your aura.
Make it a point to work on your aura every day, to connect with the
light, and to infuse your every thought, act, word, and deed with this light.
Remember that you carry the spiritual blueprint of yourself with you every
minute of every day. Let that blueprint become an expression of Divine
Love and wisdom, uplifting not only yourself, but all those who come in
contact with you. It’s a magnificent path of evolution that leads us upward
to the heaven worlds, and eventually to God our Father, Holy Mother.


APPENDIX
QUICK REFERENCE FOR MEDITATION
Three Keys to Working with Spiritual Energy
Key 1—Decide what you want the light to do for you.
Key 2—Draw the light into your aura.
Key 3—Apply the light to effect the change you desire.
Six Steps to the Higher Self Meditation
1. Relax
Before beginning any meditation, enter a relaxed state of mind. Take
your shoes off and uncross your legs. This helps the energy to flow
more freely.
2. Establish Protection
Envision yourself in a bubble of golden light. Ask that it surround you
in seven flows of this magnificent energy using the meditational prayer
for protection.
“Encircle me now in a golden bubble of protective light. I ask for
seven flows of this light to surround me, keeping me in perfect
protection.”
3. Check Your Spiritual Centers

Make sure the four main spiritual centers—mental, throat, Hermetic,
and emotional—are moving clockwise (as seen by an observer facing
you). Check by placing your hands over each one, right over left, and
feel if it is moving in the right direction. If not, ask the white light to
go to that center and move it clockwise.
4. Connect with Your Higher Self
While sitting upright in a comfortable chair, legs uncrossed, right hand
on left over the emotional center, envision a golden sun twenty-four
inches above your head (your Higher Self Point). Say the invocation:
“Heavenly Father, Holy Mother God, I raise my consciousness into
Thy consciousness where I become one with Thee. I ask to receive that
which I need and that which I need to know now.”
Feel yourself in a beautiful state of being as you place your
attention in your Higher Self.
5. Down-Ray the Light
Ask that the light be down-rayed to you by making a verbal petition
(meditative prayer). When you do this, envision the light going first to
the Higher Self Point and then beaming down to your four main
centers and aura. Three-to-five minutes for each ray is all you need.
6. Ground Yourself
When you are finished, give thanks and take a moment to feel the light
equalized throughout your aura. Feel yourself grounded and centered
before ending your meditation.
Ten Spiritual Energies to Work With
The Orange-Red Flame
Purification, cleansing. Releases black and gray atoms and dissolves them
in the mineral kingdom.
The Blue-White Fire

Replenishment, new life force. Always bring it in after working with the
orange-red flame. A wonderful healing ray.
The Golden Ray of Wisdom Light
Wisdom, courage, inner strength, self-confidence, faith, divine will, and
protection. It brings in the dynamic power of God.
The Deep Rose Pink Ray
Spiritual love, compassion, trust, and understanding. It brings in the
magnetic, nurturing power of God.
The Purple Ray
Deep peace. Effective for healing grief.
The Emerald Green Ray
Balance and harmony. Especially important for the Hermetic center.
The Silver Ray
Divine intelligence, perception. Important in the mental body and brain
cells.
The Lemon Yellow Ray
Powers of concentration. Effective when you are studying for a test or
assimilating new material.
The Turquoise Ray

Prosperity, supply, and abundance.
The Pure White Light
Spiritual upliftment; helps to equalize, align, center, and attune your
consciousness to the divine impulse.
Four Main Spiritual Centers
(All centers should be moving clockwise from the point of view of an
observer.)
Mental Center (Trinity Chalice)
Located in the middle of the forehead, this center is the nucleus of your
conscious thinking. It’s the point where you link mind, body, and soul with
spirit.
Throat Center (Eternal Ego)
Located in the middle of the throat, this center is where you express the
power of your words. When you speak positively, your words move out
with a spiritual tone.
Hermetic Center (Heart Center)
Located in the middle of the chest, this center is the nucleus of all your
worldly affairs, including people, places, things, situations, and the
conditions that constitute a situation.
Emotional Center (Spiritual Heart)

Located in the solar plexus behind the navel, this center is the nucleus of
your emotional nature, positive or negative.



